1 
 
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
ABSTRACT 
Industries & Commerce Department – “Andhra Pradesh Retail Trade Policy 2015-20” – 
Orders - Issued. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
INDUSTRIES AND COMMERCE (P & I) DEPARTMENT 
G.O.MS.No. 11                                                                            Dated: 11-01-2016 
                                                                         Read 
From the Retailer’s Association of India, Mumbai representation dated 1.6.2015.                    
>><< 
 
O R D E R: 
There is need to promote the development of Retail Sector in Andhra Pradesh. 
Several representations have been received by associations of retailers, including 
the Retailers Association of India (RAI) in which they have highlighted challenges 
facing the growth of Retail Industry in Andhra Pradesh. Suggestions have been 
received on initiatives that can be 
taken up to improve the business 
environment in the Retail Sector. 
 
2.   Government have decided to bring out a policy on Retail Trade,  focusing on 
simplification of labour laws & processes, skill development support, and single desk 
clearances, so as to stimulate growth in the Retail Sector  
 
3.  Accordingly, Ind. & Com. Dept. has held stakeholder discussions and has drafted 
the “Retail Trade Policy 2015-20”, duly benchmarking against the policy environment 
existing in other States in the Country. Government, after careful examination, hereby 
introduces the Andhra Pradesh Retail Trade Policy 2015-2020. The detailed policy 
document is appended at Annexure-I. 
Andhra Pradesh Retail Trade Policy 2015-20 
 
Andhra Pradesh has huge potential to become one of the leading destinations for retail 
trade. The State is a leader in agriculture, horticulture, dairy/poultry production and other 
raw materials, ranking amongst the top states in India across many sectors. The State is 
also providing significant thrust to sectors such as Food Processing, Electronics, Textiles & 
Pharmaceuticals, and is poised to emerge as a key sourcing hub for many segments of 
the Retail trade industry.  
 
The Retail Trade Policy 2016 aims to catalyze growth and provide thrust to the 
development of the Retail sector in Andhra Pradesh. 
 
(1)   Policy Objectives and Targets 
      Policy objectives and targets are as follows:  
  
a)    Objectives: 
  
(i) 
Make Andhra Pradesh one of the most preferred destinations for retail trade in 
India. 
(ii) 
Make Andhra Pradesh a hub for retail logistics by promoting setting up of 
warehouses and distribution centers. 
(iii) 
To accelerate investment flow to underdeveloped regions of the state. 
(iv) 
Identify and address existing infrastructure gaps affecting retail trade industry 
in AP. 
(v) 
Encourage skill development, create more employment opportunities for all 
sections of society involved in retail trade. 
(vi) 
Leverage retail trade as a tool for socio-economic development of the state. 
(vii) Promote e-commerce in the state. 
 b)    Targets: 
  
(i) 
Attract new investments worth Rs.5,000 crore in the sector by 2020.  
(ii) 
Create 20,000 additional employment opportunities in the sector by 2020.     
Contd..2 
 

 
 
2 
 
(2) 
Policy Validity and Applicability 
 
a) This policy will be valid for 5 years from date of notification, unless otherwise 
notified separately by GoAP. 
b) The policy will be applicable to all Retail Enterprises which fulfil any one of the 
following criteria: 
i. 
Retail Enterprise shall have an annual turnover of Rs. 1 crore or more   
ii. 
Retail Enterprise shall directly employ 10 or more people on full time basis at 
all times 
c) However, the Single Desk Clearance facility [referred to in section 10(a) of Retail 
Trade Policy] and Simplification of processes [referred to in section 10(b) of Policy] 
in retail sector shall be applicable to all retail enterprises irrespective of number of 
people employed or annual turnover of the retail enterprise. 
(3) 
Infrastructural Support 
(a) Connectivity infrastructure 
Andhra Pradesh offers excellent connectivity infrastructure including road, rail and 
inland water transport. In terms of improving road connectivity, there are 
plans for upcoming ring road and radial roads in proposed green field state 
capital, 6/4/2 lane inter-state connectivity and port connectivity with dedicated 
cargo lanes. For improving rail connectivity, GoAP shall strive to improve rail 
network in sub urban and backward areas, improve frequency of trains from 
different districts to the capital city and provide 100% electrification for all railway 
routes. Thrust shall also be laid on developing inland water transport in the State. 
National Waterway- 4 stretches from Kakinada to Puducherry over 1,095 kilo 
metres.  This would connect ports, cities and industrial townships and the 
estimated cargo traffic on this waterway would be 10 metric ton by 2029. 
Rajahmundry-Bhadrachalam inland waterway connectivity over the Godavari 
River is also an important waterway for cargo transport. 
(b) Setting up of Distribution Centers/ Warehouses 
GoAP shall strive to support the setup of world class warehouses/ distribution 
centers on PPP basis. The APIIC will allot land for Distribution Centers/Warehouses 
under the commercial category on lease for 33 years. 
(c) Quality Power: GoAP is committed to supplying 24X7 reliable, quality power 
to industry. While the state is currently power surplus, it has embarked on an 
ambitious plan to reach 16,484 MW of power generation capacity by 2019-20.  
 
(4) 
Skill Development 
(i) 
GoAP has set up APSSDC on lines of the National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC), a not-for-profit company under the Companies Act, 
2013. 
(ii) APSSDC will provide financial and technical support for outcome linked skill 
development initiatives. 
(iii) Skill development program for youth, focusing on tribal and rural youth, shall 
be instituted, with a target to train 1 lakh youth over a period of 5 years. An 
initial provision of Rs. 10 crores shall be made for this purpose. 
(iv) GoAP, in close coordination with retail associations, shall strive to set up 
Centre of Excellence on public private partnership mode for which it shall 
provide 50% financial assistance towards capital expenditure. 
 
(5) 
Ease of Doing Business 
(a) 
Single Desk Clearance 
i. 
GoAP shall facilitate all clearances in accordance with Single Desk Policy 
2015-20 bringing together all stakeholder departments on a common 
platform. 
ii. 
District Collector will be the nodal officer for single desk clearances at the 
district level. 
Contd.. 3 

 
 
 
3 
(b) 
Simplification of processes 
i. 
For ensuring that all permissions for retail enterprises are given at district 
level, GoAP shall put in place a mechanism of tracking with necessary 
delegation of power across departments.  
ii. 
GoAP shall review existing procedures, rules applicable to the retail sector 
with the objective of simplifying & streamlining processes, and make 
necessary changes as warranted 
(c) 
Relaxation of stocking limit 
Stocking limits for essential commodities prescribed under Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 shall be relaxed for retailer (multiple outlet) or departmental 
retailers. These are subject to various regulations/circulars as may be applicable 
from time to time. 
(d) 
Electronic Bills 
For enhancing traceability of transactions and need to save paper, organized 
retailers shall be allowed to have option to issue bills (tax invoices) to 
consumers in an electronic mode and thereby replace physical printing of paper. 
The mode for this shall be duly approved by concerned department. Retail 
enterprises should ensure that systems generating such electronic bills are not 
tampered with and turnovers in the bills are properly accounted for in account 
books of retail enterprises for the purpose of tax due thereon. 
(e) 
Store Sign Board 
GoAP shall exclude retail trade from prior permission and charges / fees with 
regards to store sign boards displaying trade name of company on business 
place of company. This shall be subject to local rules and regulations with 
regards to size and location of such sign boards. 
 
(6) 
Local Sourcing 
GoAP will work with retail associations to encourage local sourcing from Andhra 
Pradesh through buyer-seller meets 
(7) 
Mega Retail Enterprise 
i. 
Projects with an investment of at least Rs 100 crore or direct employment 
generation of 2,000 will be accorded mega retail enterprise status. Such 
investments will include setting up of at least one of the following 
components - large distribution Centers, Warehouse and Retail Enterprise. 
ii. 
The Government will extend tailor-made benefits to mega retail enterprises 
to suit particular investment requirements on case-to-case basis taking into 
account the gestation period, locational aspects, technology automation, 
project’s importance to the state’s economic growth and its ability to 
generate large scale employment for people or revenues for the state. 
 
4. 
The A.P. Retail Trade Policy will come into operation from date of issue of this order 
and shall remain in force for five years. The benefits mentioned in the Policy will be 
extended to Retail Traders as per the operating guidelines for implementation of the 
Policy to be notified separately.  
 
(BY ORDER AND IN THE NAME OF GOVERNOR OF ANDHRA PRADESH0 
 
S.S.RAWAT,  
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT & 
 COMMISSIONER FOR INDUSTRIAL PROMOTION 
To 
The Director of Industries, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad. 
The Director of Industries, Commerce & Export Promotion Wing, A.P., Hyderabad. 
The Vice Chairman & Managing Director, Andhra Pradesh Industrial 
Infrastructure Corporation, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad. 
The Director of Handlooms and Textiles, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad. 
The Director of Mines and Geology, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.  
Contd.. 4 

 
 
4 
The Managing Director, Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation, Hyderabad. 
The Special Chief Secretary to Government, Revenue (CT)  Department 
The Principal Secretary to Government, Finance Department. 
The  Principal Secretary to Government, LET &F Department 
The  Secretary to Government, Energy, I& I (Energy) Department. 
The Secretary to Government, Food & Civil Supplies Dept.  
The Secretary to Government, Agri & Co-op. Department. 
The Secretary to Govt., Skill Dev. Dept. 
The Secretary to Govt. Law Dept. 
Copy to 
The LET & F (Employment) Department. 
The Law (H)  Department. 
The Accountant General, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
The Convener, State Level Banker’s Committee. 
The General Manager, Small Industry Development Bank of India, (SIDBI), Hyderabad. 
The Pay and Accounts Officer, Hyderabad. 
All District Collectors through Director  of Industries, Hyderabad. 
All Heads of Departments through Director of Industries, Hyderabad. 
All Departments of Secretariat. 
All Govt. Companies/Corporations through Director of Industries, Hyderabad. 
The P.S. to Prl. Secretary to Chief Minister. 
The P.S. to Chief Secretary to Government 
All Private Secretaries to the Ministers. 
All General Managers, District Industries Centre in the State through Director of 
Industries, Hyderabad. 
All Sections in the Department. 
S F/SC. 
 
// FORWARDED :: BY ORDER // 
 
 
SECTION OFFICER 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  
 
  
Andhra Pradesh  
Retail Trade Policy 
2015 - 20 
      
  
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
 
 

 
 
  
Table of Contents 
1.      Introduction to Andhra Pradesh                                                                          
2.      Retail sector in India                                                                                                     
3.      Why Andhra Pradesh                                                                                                    
3.1.      Andhra Pradesh's potential as a Retail hub                                  
3.2.      Tactical advantages that Andhra Pradesh offers                   
4.      Policy Objectives and Targets                                                                                
5.      Policy Validity and Applicability                                                                          
6.      Definitions                                                                                                                     
7.      Infrastructural Support                                                                                                 
8.      Skill Development                                                                                                          
9.      Simplification of Labour Laws                                                                            
10.    Ease of Doing Business                                                                                                
11.    Local Sourcing                                                                                                                
12.    Mega Retail Enterprise                                                                                                
 
 
 

 
 
 
  
List of Abbreviations 
24x7 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
AM 
Ante Meridiem (Before Noon) 
AP 
Andhra Pradesh 
APSSDC 
Andhra Pradesh State Skill Development 
Corporation 
CAGR 
Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GoAP 
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
GoI 
Government of India 
GSDP 
Gross State Domestic Product 
GST 
Goods and Services Tax 
IBEF 
India Brand Equity Foundation 
INR or  
Indian Rupee 
IST 
Indian Standard Time 
IT 
Information Technology 
MW 
Megawatt 
NSDC 
National Skill Development Corporation 
ORP 
Organized Retail Penetration 
PM 
Post Meridiem (After Noon) 
PPP 
Public Private Partnership 
US$ 
United States Dollar 
YoY 
Year on year 
 
 

 
 
1 
1.   Introduction to Andhra Pradesh  
Andhra Pradesh is strategically located on the south-eastern coast of India and is a 
natural gateway to East and Southeast Asia. The state has a population of 4.93 crore (as 
per population census - 2011), accounting for 4% of country’s population, residing in 
4.9% of India’s geographical area. Andhra Pradesh has abundant natural resources 
(barytes, limestone, bauxite, and a number of minor minerals), fertile land and river 
basins, water resources, extensive canal system and conducive agro-climatic conditions. 
It has the second longest coastline in India and is also one of the largest producers of 
marine products. 
  
At current prices, Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) of Andhra Pradesh was 
4,75,859 crore in 2013-14. Between 2004-05 and 2012-13, average annual GSDP 
growth rate of Andhra Pradesh was 7.25% while average per capita income at (current 
prices) increased from 46,345 in 2008-09 to 88,876 in 2013-14. 
  
Advanced estimate for GSDP in 2014-15 is 5,20,030 crore and target for GSDP in 2015-
16 is 6,36,606 crore (both at current prices). 
2.   Retail sector in India 
The dynamic retail landscape of India is marked by the following factors: 
  
a)    Retail sector in India is emerging as one of the largest sectors in the economy. The 
sector is estimated at 33.4 lakh crore with a CAGR of 15% over the last five years. 
The sector accounts for over 20% of the national GDP. 
b)    While the overall retail market will grow at 12 per cent per annum, modern trade will 
grow twice as fast at 20 per cent per annum, and traditional trade at 10 per cent. 
Modern trade, which includes supermarkets, hypermarkets and other organized retail 
outlets is expected to grow three times to 11.25 lakh crore in 2020 
c)    Retail sector is the fastest growing sector in terms of employment generation, and is 
second only to agriculture sector in terms of number of people employed. The sector 
directly employs around 4 crore people, besides creating many indirect employment 
opportunities.  
d)    India had the highest number of retail outlets in the world at over 1.3 crores in 2014. 
It also has the highest number of outlets (11,903) per million inhabitants. 
e)    Organized Retail Penetration (ORP) in India is low (8%) vis-a-vis other comparable 
countries. With over 92% of business coming from fragmented unorganized sector, 
such as traditional family run stores and corner stores, Indian retail sector offers 
immense potential for growth and consolidation. 
f)     Revenue generated from organized retail is projected to touch 5.93 lakh crore by 
2019, and account for 24% of overall retail market. 
g)    E-commerce and m-commerce is expected to be one of the major growth drivers. 
The segment is projected to touch 12.5 lakh crore by 2020. With growth in e-
commerce/m-commerce industry, online retail is estimated to reach 4.38 lakh crore 
by 2020 from 14,000 crore billion in 2013 (in Gross Merchandise Value). 
  
3.   Why Andhra Pradesh  
3.1. Andhra Pradesh's potential as a Retail hub 
a)    Andhra Pradesh has huge potential to become one of the leading destinations for 
retail trade. This is reinforced by its large consumer base, increasing per capita 
income, rapid urbanization and abundance of raw material. 
b)    The State’s per capita income as per Advance estimates of 2014-15, has posted a 
growth of 11.21% YoY, reflecting enhanced standard of living and increased 
purchasing power. 
c)    Percentage of urban population to total population in the State has also shown an 
upward trend, reaching 29.47% in 2011 from 24.23% in 2001. This increase has 
helped in growth of retail ecosystem in the state. 
d)    Andhra Pradesh is also a leading state in agriculture, horticulture and Dairy/Poultry 
production, end products of which serve as inputs for retail trade industry. New 
initiatives like e-Marketing are also being implemented to eliminate mediators’ 
involvement aimed at improving linkage between farmers, food processors and 
retailers. 
Contdd. 2 
 

 
 
 
2 
e)    Andhra Pradesh constitutes about 8% of India’s total retail market of 13 million 
stores. There are 1.04 million retail stores in Andhra Pradesh which include organized 
and un-organized retail. The organized sector comprises of 83,000 stores in the state. 
It is estimated that about 16,600 number of retail stores are expected to open in 
Andhra Pradesh by 2017.  
f)     The retail sector in Andhra Pradesh has one of the fastest growth rate (9.03%) 
followed by industry sector (7.19 %) and agriculture sector (3.89 %) between 2004-
05 & 2012-13. The sector contributes to about 33% of Andhra Pradesh’s GSDP. 
g)    There are around 42 lakh individuals employed in the retail sector in Andhra Pradesh, 
with a large proportion of women employees and non-graduates, who are employed at 
retail stores  
h)    The retail sector is also a significant contributor to the state exchequer through 
taxation on sale of goods sold. 
  
3.2.Tactical advantages that Andhra Pradesh offers  
 a)    Reliable Infrastructure: 
GoAP is committed to supplying 24x7 reliable, quality power to industry. While Andhra 
Pradesh is currently power surplus, it has embarked on an ambitious plan to add 
another 16,484 MW of power generation capacity by 2019-20. 
 b)    Technology Competitiveness: 
Andhra Pradesh has been promoting investments in technology sector and facilitating 
growth of IT enabled services through proactive measures. 
  
4.   Policy Objectives and Targets 
Policy objectives and targets are as follows:  
  
a)    Objectives: 
  
i. 
Make Andhra Pradesh one of the most preferred destinations for retail trade in   
India. 
ii. 
Make Andhra Pradesh a hub for retail logistics by promoting setting up of 
warehouses and distribution centers. 
iii. 
To accelerate investment flow to underdeveloped regions of the state. 
iv. 
Identify and address existing infrastructure gaps affecting retail trade industry in 
AP. 
v. 
Encourage skill development, create more employment opportunities for all 
sections of society involved in retail trade. 
vi. 
Leverage retail trade as a tool for socio-economic development of the state. 
vii. 
Promote e-commerce in the state. 
  
b)    Targets: 
  
  i.        Attract new investments worth Rs.5,000 crore in the sector by 2020.  
  ii.        Create 20,000 additional employment opportunities in the sector by 2020.      
5.   Policy Validity and Applicability 
a) This policy will be valid for 5 years from date of notification, unless otherwise 
notified separately by GoAP. 
b) The policy will be applicable to all Retail Enterprises which fulfil any one of the 
following criteria: 
i. 
Retail Enterprise shall have an annual turnover of 1 crore or more   
ii. 
Retail Enterprise shall directly employ 10 or more people on full time basis at 
all times 
c) However, the Single Desk Clearance facility [referred to in section 10(a) of Retail 
Trade Policy] and Simplification of processes [referred to in section 10(b) of Policy] 
in retail sector shall be applicable to all retail enterprises irrespective of number of 
people employed or annual turnover of the retail enterprise. 
Contd.. 3 
 
 
 

 
 
3 
6.   Definitions 
a)    Retailer and Retail trade 
Any entity that sells goods or provides service to ultimate consumer. Ultimate 
consumer is one who buys these goods for personal use or consumption. A retailer 
therefore is one who deals with end consumers, maintains data of dealing with such 
end consumers and is responsible for service provided to end consumer. Sale of such 
goods can happen over various channels including – brick-and-mortar, direct selling, 
e-commerce, television, mobile phones or tablets (m-commerce), and other channels. 
Any entity or brand that portrays itself as a store or seller to end consumer and 
thereby creates a service expectation in the mind of consumer would be termed as a 
retailer. Activity undertaken by a retailer is termed as retail trade. 
b)    Retail Enterprise 
Retail Enterprise is a ‘shop’ as defined in Section 2 (21) of Andhra Pradesh Shops & 
Establishments Act, 1988. 
c)    Warehouse 
"Warehouse" means any premises (including any protected place) conforming to all 
requirements including manpower specified by relevant and competent authority by 
regulations wherein warehouseman takes custody of goods deposited by depositor and 
includes a place of storage of goods under controlled conditions of temperature and 
humidity or otherwise.  
  
d)    Distribution Center 
Distribution center is a facility at a single location that stocks a vast number of 
products sourced from different suppliers, and distributes goods to retail stores or 
direct-to-consumer.  
  
7.   Infrastructural Support 
 
a)    Connectivity infrastructure 
Andhra Pradesh offers excellent connectivity infrastructure including road, rail and 
inland water transport. In terms of improving road connectivity, there are plans for 
upcoming ring road and radial roads in proposed greenfield state capital, 6/4/2 lane 
inter-state connectivity and port connectivity with dedicated cargo lanes.  For 
improving rail connectivity, GoAP shall strive to improve rail network in sub urban and 
backward areas, improve frequency of trains from different districts to the capital city 
and provide 100% electrification for all railway routes. Thrust shall also be laid on 
developing inland water transport in the State. National Waterway-4 stretches from 
Kakinada to Puducherry over 1095 kilometers. This would connect ports, cities and 
industrial townships and the estimated cargo traffic on this waterway would be 10 
metric ton by 2029. Rajahmundry-Bhadrachalam inland waterway connectivity over 
the Godavari River is also an important waterway for cargo transport. 
  
b)    Setting up of Distribution Centers/ Warehouses 
GoAP shall strive to support the setup of world class warehouses/ distribution centers 
on PPP basis. The APIIC will allot land for Distribution Centers/Warehouses under the 
commercial category on lease for 33 years . 
   
c)    Quality Power: GoAP is committed to supplying 24X7 reliable, quality power to 
industry. While the state is currently power surplus, it has embarked on an ambitious 
plan to reach 16,484 MW of power generation capacity by 2019-20.  
  
 
8.   Skill Development 
a)     General Initiatives: 
      i.        GoAP has set up APSSDC on lines of the National Skill Development   
Corporation (NSDC), a not-for-profit company under the Companies Act, 2013. 
      ii.        APSSDC will provide financial and technical support for outcome linked skill 
development initiatives. 
  
Contd.. 4 
 

 
 
 
4 
 
 
b)    Sector Specific Initiatives 
      i.        APSSDC and renowned private institutions will institute training-based 
certification and placement programs. 
      ii.        APSSDC will collaborate with various retail associations as well as local retail 
industry to understand industry requirements and shall institute a merit based, 
defined certification and placement procedure for developing appropriate manpower 
for retail enterprises in the State. This shall be helpful for small enterprises which 
are not in position to impart the required training in-house. 
    iii.        Skill development program for youth, focusing on tribal and rural youth, shall 
be instituted, with a target to train 1 lakh youth over a period of 5 years. An initial 
provision of 10 crores shall be made for this purpose. 
   iv.        GoAP,in close coordination with retail associations, shall strive to set up Centres 
of Excellence on public private partnership mode for which it shall provide 50% 
financial assistance towards capital expenditure. 
  
9.   Simplification of Labour Laws 
      i.        Retail enterprises shall be allowed to stay open every day of the year provided 
that the employees are given compensatory, compulsory weekly offs on a 
preferential basis without any deduction of benefits (monetary and otherwise). 
List of such holidays for a month shall be placed on notice boards in advance. 
     ii.        Working hours of the employees shall be a maximum of 8 hours per day and 
not more than 48 hours in a week. Manpower deployment details shall be added 
to the application for registration by the employer (which is now online under the 
Integrated Registration Act, 2015). 
    iii.        Record of overtime shall be maintained in wages register separately in respect 
of the employees who worked beyond normal working hours and wages for 
overtime shall be paid to all eligible employees in accordance to provisions of the 
Act. 
   iv.        The employees working on a national holiday shall be given a compensatory 
holiday in addition to overtime wages.  
    v.        Retail enterprise shall be allowed to operate between 6 AM and 11 PM IST, 
provided employees work in a minimum of two shifts with a minimum of one hour 
changeover period. This is subject to the employer providing shift-wise employee 
details and specifying weekly holiday for each of the employees. 
   vi.        Employment of women shall be permitted in all shifts, subject to the enterprises 
ensuring safe and secure working environment and secure conveyance from 
workplace to place of residence. The employer shall be solely responsible for 
ensuring the above till women employees reach respective place of residence. 
  vii.        The state’s inspection system is through an Inspection Portal which is 
computerized, randomized, and risk based, allowing significant relief from routine 
inspections under various acts.Information obtained from the annual combined 
return under the Integrated Registration Act, 2015 shall be used for this purpose, 
and only those establishments, which are found in the grey will be included in the 
inspection-required category. 
viii.        Retail enterprise shall be allowed to offer part-time employment subject to the 
working hours for part time employees being expressly specified. Minimum per 
hour wage rate shall be proportionately determined in accordance with minimum 
monthly wage rate specified under Minimum Wages Act. Retail unit cannot engage 
more than 25% of its employees as part time employees. This would be subject 
to the enterprises strictly adhering to laws regarding child labour and other similar 
applicable laws/rules. 
   ix.        Retail enterprise shall be allowed to maintain employee related records in 
electronic form, and provisions shall be made to accept returns in electronic form 
in line with progress of computerization in Labour department. 
    x.        Food and Grocery business retail enterprise shall be included under the Andhra 
Pradesh Essential Services Maintenance Act as ‘Essential Services' to dissuade 
strikes.  
 
Contd.. 5 
 

 
 
5 
 
   xi.        For distribution centers and warehouses, GoAP will give permission for 24x7 
(three shifts) operations, flexibility in employment conditions including working 
hours for women and shorter or longer shift timings and hiring of contract 
workers. Safety and security of all employees, not only place of employment, but 
also during commute from workplace to place of residence needs to be ensured.  
  xii.        Distribution centers and warehouses for the retail sector will be declared to be a 
‘Public Utility’ under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 in order to prevent flash 
strikes. 
 10.      Ease of Doing Business 
 a)    Single Desk Clearance 
              i.        GoAP shall facilitate all clearances in accordance with Single Desk Policy 
2015-20 bringing together all stakeholder departments on a common platform. 
            ii.        District Collector will be the nodal officer for single desk clearances at the 
district level. 
 b)    Simplification of processes 
i. 
For ensuring that all permissions for retail enterprises are given at district 
level, GoAP shall put in place a mechanism of tracking with necessary 
delegation of power across departments. 
ii. 
GoAP shall review existing procedures, rules applicable to the retail sector 
with the objective of simplifying & streamlining processes, and make 
necessary changes as warranted. 
  
c)    Relaxation of stocking limit  
Stocking limits for essential commodities prescribed under Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 shall be relaxed for retail enterprises(multiple outlet) or departmental retail 
enterprises. These are subject to various regulations/circulars as may be applicable 
from time to time. 
  
d)    Electronic Bills 
For enhancing traceability of transactions and need to save paper, organized retail 
enterprises shall be allowed to have option to issue bills (tax invoices) to consumers in 
an electronic mode and thereby replace physical printing of paper. The mode for this 
shall be duly approved by concerned department. Retail enterprises should ensure that 
systems generating such electronic bills are not tampered with and turnovers in the 
bills are properly accounted for in account books of retail enterprises for the purpose of 
tax due thereon. 
  
 e)    Store Sign Board 
GoAP shall exclude retail trade from prior permission and charges / fees with regards 
to store sign boards displaying trade name of company on business place of company. 
This shall be subject to local rules and regulations with regards to size and location of 
such sign boards. 
  
11.      Local Sourcing 
GoAP will work with retail associations to encourage local sourcing from Andhra 
Pradesh through buyer-seller meets. 
  
12.      Mega Retail Enterprise 
i. 
Projects with an investment of at least 100 crore or direct employment 
generation of 2,000 will be accorded mega retail enterprise status. Such 
investments will include setting up of at least one of the following 
components–large distribution Centers, Warehouse and Retail Enterprise.  
 
ii. 
The Government will extend tailor-made benefits to mega retail enterprises 
to suit particular investment requirements on case-to-case basis taking into 
account the gestation period, locational aspects, technology automation, 
project’s importance to the state’s economic growth and its ability to 
generate large scale employment for people or revenues for the state. 
                                                      S.S.RAWAT, 
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT & 
 COMMISSIONER FOR INDUSTRIAL PROMOTION 
