FSSAI IN NEWS 
 
 
FSSAI to revamp licensing and registration regulations under FSS Act 
Monday, 21 May, 2018, 08 : 00 AM [IST] 
Ashwani Maindola, New Delhi 
FSSAI has decided to revamp the whole licensing and registration regulations 
under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, which shall focus more on raising 
the bar for food safety compliance instead of just the documentation by means of 
licensing 
and 
registration. 
 
In the recently-held meeting of the Central Advisory Committee, the apex food 
regulator of the country, has decided to review the regulations and restructure it in a 
way that would ensure more compliance form the FBOs. For that, the first thing 
FSSAI plans to do is recategorise the FBOs according to the annual turnover to 
lower 
the 
bar 
for 
entry 
into 
the 
food 
safety 
ecosystem. 
 
According to FSSAI’s review document, the proposed limit for registration under 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, has been set at Rs 20 lakh, which is 
currently at Rs 12 lakh,which means now FBOs with a turnover of upto Rs 20 lakh 
require 
to 
only 
register 
with 
FSSAI. 
 
Besides, the regulator has proposed to create three categories of licenses. While 
Level A (for FBOs whose turnover is between Rs 20 lakh and Rs 5 crore) and Level 
B (for FBOs whose turnover is between Rs 5 crore and Rs 75 crore) licenses will be 
issued by the state licensing authorities, the third category (Level C) is for FBOs 
whose turnover is over Rs 75 crore, and their licenses will be issued by the Central 
licensing 
authority. 
 
However, if a food business has premises located in two or more states, it has to 
apply for a Level C license, irrespective of the turnover under the proposed draft. 
 
Further, entry into licensing and registration has been made easier under the draft, 
which stated that the registration to be issued on the basis of self-declaration 
without inspection. For low-risk category, the license would be issued after the 
submission of documents, while for high-risk category, the issuance of license is 
subject 
to 
inspection 
along 
with 
documentation. 
 
Registrations will be issued for a period of five years and licenses for three years. 
 
Further, draft proposal pushes for the simplification of the kinds of businesses as 
well, with seven categories, including manufacturing [which covers general food 

FSSAI IN NEWS 
 
business operators (FBOs), milk, meat, fish and food supplements]. The other kinds 
include storage, transport, trade, retail (both general and e-commerce), food 
services 
(both 
general 
and 
e-commerce) 
and 
imports. 
 
The focus of FSSAI has been for some time to increase the level of compliance and 
awareness about the requisites under the regulations with regards of food safety 
ecosystem. It has also been come to the notice of the regulator that despite having 
registration or license, FBOs often lack even in the basic subjects, like sanitation 
and 
hygiene. 
 
In the meeting, it has been decided that the FSSAI headquarters shall be 
responsible for ensuring the compliance through a direct monitoring system on real-
time basis, as all other FBOs’ premises will be linked with the head office for the 
purpose. 
 
The document added that inspection shall take place once a year by the authority or 
third party. It also spoke about the transition. The proposal has stated that new 
licenses and registration will be issued to the FBOs for the remaining period of 
validity 
without 
any 
fees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
