Privacy Policy 
 
The Goa Deposit Refund Scheme (DRS) Website is owned, developed, operated and maintained by the 
Goa Coastal Environment Management System (GC&EMS), Department of Environment and Climate 
Change, Government of Goa (hereinafter referred to as “we”, “our”, or “us”). We are committed to 
protecting and respecting your privacy. Any information or data collected and processed on the 
Website is done in accordance with the provisions Information Technology Act, 2000 read with its 
Rules and other national and state laws relating to the collection and processing of personal data. 
Please read the following carefully to understand our practices regarding the collection and processing 
of your information and data. 
 
This Privacy Policy is required to be read in conjunction with the Terms of Use available on the 
website.  Please read this Privacy Policy and Terms of Use carefully before accessing and/or using this 
website. By accessing, browsing, or otherwise using the website, you acknowledge that you have 
read, understood, and agree to be bound by the Terms of Use and this Privacy Policy, and that you 
consent to your information and data being collected, stored and used in the manner laid out in this 
Privacy Policy. 
 
(1)​  Consent 
 
The collecting and retaining agency is the Goa Coastal Environment Management System 
(GC&EMS), Department of Environment and Climate Change, Government of Goa. By 
accessing and/or using this Website, you expressly consent to the collection, storage, 
processing, and use of your Information in the manner described in this Privacy Policy. If you 
do not agree with any part of this Privacy Policy, you must immediately discontinue access and 
use of the website. 
 
Unless specifically mentioned elsewhere, You have the right to access the information you 
have provided to us and to request its correction, completion, amendment, or update. Any 
such request should be submitted to us via email at the address provided on the Website. 
 
You may at any time withdraw your consent for the subsequent use of Your Information by 
sending an email to us. Your mail must clearly state the scope and nature of the withdrawal of 
consent. We reserve the right to seek further details from you in order to ascertain the exact 
nature of the withdrawal of consent. Please note that Withdrawal of Consent may prevent your 
ability to access and/ or use the Website. 
 
 
 

 
(2)​ Your Information 
 
We may collect Your Information and data (hereinafter referred to as “Your Information”) 
through various means and in various places, including but not limited to account setup, 
contact us, or when you otherwise interact with us.  
 
We may collect the following information only to the extent that it is necessary for the 
purposes set out in this Privacy Policy: 
 
a.​ Organization Information: Organization name, Company Incorporation Number 
(CIN) 
for 
Private 
Limited 
Companies, 
LLPIN 
for 
LLP 
Firm, 
GSTIN- 
Proprietorship/Partnership 
Firms, 
PAN, 
and 
Registration 
under 
applicable 
environmental laws and rules 
b.​ Contact information of authorized representative:  first and last name, email 
address, postal address, country, mobile number, and PAN of the representative, any 
additional identification or verification documents you voluntarily provide or that we 
are legally required to collect. 
c.​
Brand Registration Details: Brand or Trade Name(s) to be registered, Legal Entity 
Information such as ownership details, trademarks, or other proofs of brand 
proprietorship, Supporting documentation demonstrating the brand’s compliance with 
relevant product, packaging, and environmental regulations, any other information 
that may be necessary for brand verification, onboarding, or continued compliance 
with applicable laws. 
d.​ Product Information: comprehensive details relating to the products you sell, 
distribute, or otherwise make available in Goa, including but not limited to product 
identification and description, brand details, and  
SKU details, Facility details, 
warehouse details. 
e.​ Financial Information: Payment instrument information, transaction history, mode 
of payment, UPI ID, and related details. 
f.​
Technical Information: Internet Protocol (IP) address, browser type, operating 
system, and device identifiers, Website usage metrics such as pages visited, time 
spent, navigation paths, and referring/exit pages, automated data gathered through 
cookies, pixels, and similar technologies to remember preferences, enable secure 
login, tailor content, and measure service performance, general location information 
derived from IP address for security and analytics. 
 
 

g.​ User Reviews, Feedback, and Opinions: Any reviews, comments, survey 
responses, or feedback you voluntarily provide about our services, information used to 
monitor service quality, improve offerings, address issues, and where appropriate 
display anonymized testimonials or user insights. 
 
You understand that certain information provided by you will qualify to be personally 
identifiable sensitive information under the Information Technology (Reasonable Security 
Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data and Information) Rules, 2011 and the 
disclosure of the same is completely voluntary. We confirm that the storage of such personal 
information is in compliance with the requirements under the Information Technology 
(Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data and Information) 
Rules, 2011. You expressly consent to the collection, storage and transmission of personally 
identifiable and sensitive information, and shall not hold us liable or make any claims against 
us in respect of the collection, storage, and transmission of Your Information in accordance 
with the Terms of Use and this Privacy Policy. You also understand that the efficiency of the 
Website is dependent on the accuracy and completeness of the information provided by you. 
Therefore, it is requested that you keep the information up to date.  
 
This Website records your visit and logs the following information for statistical purposes: your 
server's address; the name of the top-level domain from which you access the Internet (for 
example, .gov, .com, .in, etc.); the type of browser you use; the date and time you access the 
site; the pages you have accessed and the documents downloaded and the previous Internet 
address from which you linked directly to the site. 
 
We will not identify users or their browsing activities, except when a law enforcement agency 
may exercise a warrant to inspect the service provider's logs. 
 
(3)​ Purpose of Storage 
 
We will collect and process Information exclusively to facilitate the effective implementation, 
management, and operationalisation of the Deposit Refund Scheme (DRS) in the State of Goa. 
The Information is used to verify eligibility, track deposits and refunds, ensure compliance with 
regulatory requirements, and support the smooth functioning of all scheme-related activities. 
 
We may store and use your Information for the following Purposes -  
●​
Onboarding various stakeholders on DRS website; 
●​
Enabling stakeholder engagement; 
●​
Enabling dissemination of information about the DRS Scheme; 
●​
Tracking and monitoring the flow of money between interacting stakeholders; 

●​
Regulatory compliance of DRS; 
●​
To enhance your experience on the Website by analysing your behaviour on an 
aggregate basis; 
●​
For services related to communication, marketing, security, analytics, fraud detection, 
risk assessment and research;  
●​
To resolve disputes; troubleshoot problems; technical support and fixing bugs; help 
promote a safe service; 
●​
To carry out checks, screenings or due diligence checks as lawfully required by us and 
detect and protect us against error, fraud, money laundering and other criminal 
activity; 
●​
To identify security breaches and attacks; investigating, preventing, and taking action 
on illegal or suspected fraud or money laundering activities and conducting forensic 
audits as part of internal or external audit or investigation by government agencies 
located within India or outside the Indian jurisdiction; 
●​
To meet legal obligations; 
●​
For any other ancillary purpose as may be disclosed from time to time.  
 
While we may also process your Information for other legitimate business cases, we do not 
store or otherwise retain Your Information for longer than is necessary to achieve the 
purposes set out above or any such period as may be required for compliance under applicable 
laws. Further, we ensure to take appropriate steps to minimize the processing to the extent 
possible, making it less intrusive to your privacy. 
 
(4)​ Disclosure of Your Information 
 
We do not disclose Your Information to any third parties without your consent, unless such 
disclosure or transfer is: 
a.​
Required for the implementation of DRS in the State of Goa; or 
b.​
Required in order to comply with any applicable law, court order, or direction. 
 
We may share your Information with service providers for the purpose of ensuring smooth 
operations and implementation of the DRS Scheme in the State of Goa. Such service 
providers, including, without limitation, may be government appointed System Operator, 
financial institutions, regulatory bodies, internal teams such as marketing, printing service 
providers, collection agents, logistics agents, website hosting services, or such other business 
partners and associates of the System Operator. We will take commercially reasonable steps to 
ensure these service providers adhere to the security standards we apply to your Information 
and prohibit them from using your Information for any reason apart from the operations and 
implementation of DRS Scheme in the State of Goa.  

 
 
We may also disclose your personal information as is necessary to: (i) comply with a court 
order; (ii) cooperate with law enforcement or other government agencies; (iii) establish or 
exercise its legal rights; (iv) defend against legal claims; (vi) help with internal and external 
investigations; or (vii) as otherwise required by law or permitted by law. We may disclose your 
information to others in connection with the sale, merger, acquisition , or in connection with 
any transaction that involves the sale or assignment of some or all of our assets, including 
during the diligence process. 
 
We reserve the right to share with third parties, anonymized data with third parties including 
organizations 
creating 
waste 
awareness, 
with 
non-governmental 
or 
governmental 
organizations, with circular economy research organizations, with carbon credit organization, 
for market research, for extended producer responsibility fulfillment, to aid policy making, 
and/or any other organizations working in the waste management space to promote 
environmentally sustainable waste management. You hereby agree and understand that we 
will not require your consent while sharing such anonymized data. 
 
(5)​ Data Security/ Protection of Your Information 
 
We implement and maintain appropriate administrative, physical, electronic, procedural, and 
technical safeguards, on a best-effort basis, to protect Your Information against unauthorized 
access, alteration, disclosure, loss, or destruction. These safeguards are designed to meet the 
reasonable security practices and procedures prescribed under the Information Technology 
Act, 2000, and the rules framed thereunder, including the Information Technology (Reasonable 
Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011, as 
amended from time to time.  
 
The technical safeguards used by us include, without limit, the following -  (a) Use of firewalls, 
encryption and data leakage prevention technologies to protect information; (b) Audit of all 
vendors and service providers and execution of non-disclosure agreements before availing 
their services; (c) Continuous monitoring of the physical and technical environment for 
vulnerabilities and potential intrusions and implementation of controls to identify and address 
any concern related to protection of data. 
 
Your Information is securely stored, with access strictly limited to authorised personnel. We do 
not permit any unauthorized access in any form. Further, Your Information is retained only for 
as long as necessary to achieve the purposes outlined above and is disposed of in accordance 
with applicable legal and regulatory requirements. 

 
While we endeavour to employ industry-standard security measures, you acknowledge and 
agree that no system of data storage or transmission over the Internet can be guaranteed to 
be 100% secure. Accordingly, we cannot and do not warrant or guarantee the absolute 
security of Your Information and shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or unauthorized 
access arising from circumstances beyond its reasonable control. 
 
To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, we shall not be liable in any manner 
whatsoever for any default, breach, or unauthorized access to Your Information despite the 
adoption of such reasonable security measures. 
 
(6)​Children Information  
 
We do not knowingly solicit or collect Information from children under the age of 18 and use of 
our Website is available only to persons who can form a legally binding contract under the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872. If you are under the age of 18 years then you must use the 
Website under the supervision of your parent, legal guardian, or any responsible adult. 
   
(7)​Third Party Sites and Applications 
 
This Website includes links to other platforms, websites, or applications that are owned and 
controlled by third parties. We disclaim any responsibility or liability for the acts, omissions, 
policies, or practices of any third party, including but not limited to their collection, use, 
storage, or disclosure of Your Information. Any access to or use of third-party websites, 
applications, or services, including the handling of Your Information by such third parties, is 
solely at your own risk, and you are advised to review their respective privacy policies and 
terms and conditions. We shall not be held liable, whether in contract, tort, equity, or 
otherwise, for any loss, damage, claim, or expense arising directly or indirectly from such 
third-party actions or policies. 
 
(8)​  Breach of Privacy Policy 
 
Without prejudice to any rights available to us under the Terms of Use and this Privacy Policy,if 
you breach any terms and conditions in any way of this Privacy Policy, we may take such 
action which deems appropriate to deal with the breach, including suspending your access to 
the website, prohibiting you from accessing in the website, blocking computers using your IP 
address from accessing the website, contracting your internet service provider to request that 
they block your access to the website and/ or bringing court proceedings against you. 
 

(9)​  Changes to Policy 
 
We reserve the right, at our sole discretion, to amend, modify, supplement, or withdraw any 
part of this Privacy Policy at any time.  In the event of such changes, we will update the “ 
Effective Date” on the Website from time to time. You are advised to look up the Privacy Policy 
regularly for such changes. Your continued use of our platform/ services post the changes to 
the privacy policy will be construed as your acceptance of the new Privacy Policy. In case you 
don't agree to the new Privacy Policy, you must stop accessing and or using the Website. You 
hereby acknowledge that any collection, Storage, processing, or other use of Your Information 
shall be governed by the Privacy policy as applicable at the time of such collection, storage, 
Processing, or other use. 
 
(10)​
Limitation of Liability 
 
In no event shall we be liable to you or any third party for any acts/omissions due to incorrect 
and/or misrepresentation of Information submitted by you. You expressly acknowledge and 
consent that the Information provided by you is true and accurate. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Policy, our liability shall be triggered only in the event where unauthorised 
disclosure of Information is a direct result of proven negligence, wilful misconduct or fraud by 
us. We endeavour to take all reasonable measures to limit usage of your Information to the 
purpose stated in this Privacy Policy. 
     
(11)​
Governing Law and Jurisdiction 
 
This Privacy Policy shall be governed by, interpreted, and construed in accordance with Indian 
Law. The jurisdiction of the Courts with respect to the subject matter of this Agreement shall 
be the Courts of Goa in India, and each of the parties hereto submits itself to the exclusive 
jurisdiction for any such action. 
 
(12)​
Contact Us 
 
In case of any queries, questions, comments, or grievances with regard to the privacy policy, 
or if you wish to update your information, you can write to Info@goadrs.com  
 
