sIgA -rg{4, ?Tr.s.i.
Atul Chaturvedi, tns
qEq
SECRETARY
rrd{+{ qqe
qTikl istitrrt
II$FITITEFI, CVJqTdffi F fTfi q-{Tilq
csJcril{ vq gqfr t{,ryFr
Eft rd-{, ag ftd-lloool
Government of lndia
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying
Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-i10001
D.O. No. R-430231 1/201 9-NLM-DADF
14th Janua ry, 2021
Dear C[u<J ftcv-[u.w ,
u 
eLY ! -v--' 
( /
As you may be aware that 10 States have reported Highly Pathogenic Avian
lnfluenza. ln the present scenario Avian lnfluenza has been OetectbO in wild birds and
poultry. lt is observed that the States and local administrations have banned movement
of live birds, chicken meat and egg including processed meat, canned meat etc.
2. 
This Department has taken various steps to control and containment of the
disease. However, it is observed that the States have put ban on the movement and
selling of poultry products including processed products either by the State as a whole
or by the local authority. Such kind of banning has created panic in human being.
3. 
I would impress upon that Avian lnfluenza is a virus that infect the birds. lndia
had been reporting the disease since 2006 and every year the disease outbreak
happens. Till date there is no report of human infection. The country has been
controlling the disease effectively through culling. There is no scientific report available
all over globe that the infection of HSN1 or any other Strain of Avian lnfluenza viruses
spread through the processed products.
4. 
lt is further clarified that the virus gets destroyed atTO degree centigrade within 3
second. Therefore, consumption of meat and egg properly cooked atTO degree have no
risk. The banning of movement of poultry because of infection in wild bird is not
justifiable and do not have scientific basis. The ban should be imposed only within the
radius of 10 Km of infected zone.
5. 
Therefore, you are requested to issue instruction to concerned State authorities
and Local Administration not to impose ban and allow selling of poultry products
sourced from the non-infected areas/ states etc.
KJ;H,\ \r(
Yours sincere ly,
tul Chaturvedi)
All the Chief Secretaries of the State
e-Mail :secyahd@nic.in Tel.: 91-11-23382608 Fax: 91-11-23388006 Website : dahd.nic.in
