:j
Sub: Retoil Trcde Policy of Kornatoko - 2015.
-:O:-
PREAIvtBLE:
Retoiling in fndiq is one of the pillors of its economy ond occounts for
14 to LD percent of its GDP. The Indion retoil morket is estimoted to be
US$ 5OO billion and one of the top f ive retoil markets in the world by economic
volue. fndio is one of the fastest growing retoil morkets in the world, with .
1.2 biflion people.
The fndiqn retoil sector is highly f rogmented snd the unorg anized sector
hos oround 13 million retoil out.lets thet qccount for qround 95-96% of the
t6tal TniJian retail i'ndustry:-Howeyer;-going-'f'orwcrd-"t'he-organi'zed-6ecr'adsl'-=:,
growth potentiol is expected to increose due to globolizction, high economic
growth, ond ir"nProved lifestYle.
The recent aariiloirnents in the stote of Kornqtakq in regord to Retoil
Trode €nterprises ore noteworthy. The retail trode enterprise comprises
enterpris es engaged in retqiling goods ond services. These enterprises foll into
vorious segments; which include food ond grocerY, opporel, footweqr, consumer
durobles, home opplionces qnd eguipment, restourcnts, cinemo holls'
multiplexes, home furnishing ond furniture, jewellery, books, huSic, wotches''
phorrncceuticols, beouty qnd heqlthcore. These enterprises sell vorious
cotegories of iterns qnd use multiple chonnels including brick ond mortor, direct
selling, e-commerce ond other chcnnels.
The ratqil distribution center provides o cruciol, dyncmic snd evolving
f ink between producery and consum€rs qcfoss Kornqtokq. AI the simplest level,
the retailenterprisa liRicotiV makes a substontial contribution to employment -
betn;gthe second lorgest enterprise in o notionol ecohomt whllst simultoneously
providing o gignif icant contribution to both business octivity qnd GDP.

Retoilers Associotion of fndio (RAI) hos represented the Government of ,.i
Kqrnotoko to bring out Retqil Trode Policy since it contributes directly to the
growth of the Stqte economy.
Based on the phenomenol growth in the retoil enterprise in Kornotqko
ond cgnsidering the potentiol it offers to boost the Stqt e's economy, on
u?gencY wos felt to formulote q policy to propel retoil in Kornqtoko so thot it
cankeep poce with the globol developments.
The policy hos been drofted through q consultotion process with the
stokeholders i.e. Retqilers Associotion of fndiq qnd related Governmenr
Deportments. The views ond suggestions offered by oll the stqkeholders hqve
been incorporoted suitably in the policy with the objective of moking
Kornotakq os one of the leoding destinotions for retqil trade"
fn the light of the obove, o decision hos 6een token by the Government
to formulote ond odopt o Retqil Trode Policy of Kornotqko - 2Ot5 for o period"
of 5 I?9r:'
Hencethe f ollowing order:
In the circumstqnces exploined in the preomble , Government is pleosed
. ..to onnounce the Retail Trade Policy of Kornotoko - 2Ot5 qs detailed in
Annexure to this Government Order.
The vision of Retqil Trqde Policy is to creote qn efficient qnd seomless
internql trqde opportunity ond to boost the economic competitiveness of the
Stqte Economy by promoting ond fccilitoting wor:ld closs logistics ond
worehouse choinl minimizing wostoge ond tronsoction cost within the retoil
0
enterprise, giving the best volue for money to the ultimote consumer while ot
the some time moximizing rdrlurns to the product, porticulorly fcrmers qnd
DATED: 13th JUNE 2016
SMEs.
!

The objectives of Retoil Trode Policy cre qs follows:
. To boost Kornotoko's positiofl in the Retqil Trqde within the
country.
. To further occelerore investment flow to underdeveloped
regions of the stote.
. To creqte lorge locol employment
youth of qll sections of the
especiolly in rurol oreqs.
. To leveroge Retqil Trqde Gs
development of the Stqte.
Government desires to achievz these objectivas through the following
Policy initiqtives: 
'
-. Appointment of nodol office in Government of Kornotoko to
fqcil itqte single window cleoronce.
.r---.-Sirnpllf-icsfion ol-lqbe-trt-[sw-S--=-R-e-l-qxqtions of rules under the
Shops qnd Estoblishment Act with regord to working hours,
work shifts ond employtnent of port-time workers ond
'.' 
moi nteno nce of records.
. fnclusion of Foo*ond Grocery Retoiling in 'essentiol' services
- No interruption of services during industrial oction / civic
unrest. (EsMA)
. Reloxotion of stocking limit under Essentiol Comrnodities Act.
(Esscorn) on o cose to cose bosis depending on the porticulor
circumstance prevoiling of thqt time.
Promotion of Humqn Resource Development snd Skill
Devefopmenf in the retoil enterprise.
Progmatic implementotion of Pockoged Commodities
Regulotions.
. Creotion of REZ { Retoil Entertainment Zones )
. Treating Distribution Centres at por with industries
. fndustriol spoces *lthin the conf in es of cities
o Electronic Bills 
"' 
+
Tl+e Retoil Trgde eoiicy shqll come in to effect from the dqte of issue of
Gcvo-rwnent Oi"der erid wili be valid for a period of five yeors or ttll € flew
policy is.ennounced.
opportunities, to educqte the
society ocross the region,
q tool f or socio-economic
a

To,
t
This order issues with the concurren ce of Finqnce Deportment vide No. , ,)
FD 1146 Exp-1/2O15 doted 17.11.2015. Food, Civil Supplies qnd Consumer
Affoirs Dept. vide No. ero?i 42 eicr&eld 201s dqted 7.0g.?O15, Lqbour Dept.
vide No. E?.a 352 Defq€^3 Z}tS, doted 4.lt.ZOtS ond Urbqn Development Dept.
vide No. CT 291 CSC zoLs/Part-3, doted 9.12.2015 ond Cobinet opprovcl
doted 08.06.2016.
By Order ond in the nqme of the
Addf . Chief Secretory to Goverwnent
Commerce & fndustries Deportment
The Compiler, KornotokaGazetre, Bongolore for publicotion in the next issue of
the Gazette and supply 25 copies.to this offiie.
1' The Principol Accountont Generol (6&554), Kornotqkq.-llg-ry-- gqildt-lg- ld-rrdi-1..---...
- -- - tsfi uwan' ;' po3t"B6x-No.-53:gg, Bangaruru :01.'
2- The Principol Accounton t Genersl (E&RSA), Kornotoko, New Building, ,Audit
Bhowon', Post Box No. 539g, Bengoluru _01.
3. The Principol Accountant Generol (A&E), Kornotqkq, pork House Rood, post Box
No. 5329, B.engaluru-01. ti
4. All Additional Chief Secretaries/Principol Secretqries/secretories to Govt.
5. The Principol.Secretory'to Hon'ble Chief Minister, Vidhqno Soudha, Bengoluru -01.
6. The Commissioner for fndustriql Developrnent ond Director of Industries ond
conmerce, Khonijo Bhovon Rqce course Rood, Bengoluru-Ol.
7. The Commissioner for Commerciql Toxes, Vcnijyo Therige Koryoloyo, 6ondhi
Nogor, Bengoluru-O9.
8. The Monoging Director, Visvesvoroyq Trode Promotion Centre,3.d Floor, ,A, Block,
BMTC complex, shqnthinogcr, Doubre Rood, Bengaruru-l7.
9' The Monqging Director, Kornotoko Udyog Mitrc, Khonijo Bhovon, Roce Course
Rood, Bengoluru-O1.
10. Joint Director (ID), Directorate of rndustries ond Comm erce, Khonija Bhcvcn
Rqce Course Roqd, Bengoluru-0l.
4 Medium fndustries ond Tourism, Vidhono
o Govt., Commerce & Industries Deportment,
13. 6uord File / Spare Copies.

ANNEXURE TO
G.O- NO Cr ?gt Csc ?ot5, DATED t3.O6.20t6
RETAIL TRADE POLTCY OF KARNATAK A - 2OI5
7. Preamble:
The fndion retoil industry is one of the fqstest growing in the wor:ld. Retoiling
in fndio is one of the pillors of its economyand qccor.tnts for 74to t5 percentof its
CDP. The fndian retail mqrket is estimqted to be U5$ 500 billion qnd is expected to
grow to US$ 1.3 trillion by 2O2O, regisfering a Compound Annuol Growth Rqte
{CAGR) of 16.7 per cent over 2Ot5-2O.
Indian retoil sector occounts for 22 per cent of the gross donestic pnoduct
(6DP) ond pontributes to 8 per cent of the totql employrnent.
Growth of Retoil in fndio is contributed by the growing middle class which is
expected to be. st:ound.9l..nriJlion...househo.lds .Ql.2O3O.comp ar?A..to.21 .rnillion...today
ond it is projected thqt by 2030, 570 million people are""xpecfed to live in urbon
orecs which is almost twice thct of US todoy.
Retoil in trndio hos groral4 over yeqrs from essentiol{y owner monned smqll
shops to modern trode including conveniefice stores, supermorkets, hypermorkets
ond other organized,retoil outletsand the retoil ond logistic industry estimoted to
give {ivelihood to obout 3.3% of rndion poprlation (obout 40 million).
ft is estimoted thot ifureore cround 13 million retail orrtJets cccounting for
95-96% of totol fndion Retoil fndustry which cre mostly in the unorgonized sector
qnd are highly trogmented.
fndiq is the f ifth lorgest pref erred retoil destination globolly. The country is
omong the highest in the wor{d in terms of per pcpit"a retqil store ovoilqbility. Indio's
retqif sector is experiencirp exponentiol prowth, with retqil developrnent toking
ploce not just in mojor cities ond metros, but also in Tier-ff ond Ter-fff cities.
ic profile (more thcn 31% of the
le incomes, urbonizqtion, clunging
her foctors dnivihg growth in the
organized refoil morket in fndio.

.. 
.)!:t+)?a
fndio's populotion is toking to online retoil in o big way. The online retoil
morket is expected to grow from US$ 6 billion to U5$ 70 billion during Fy15-Fy20.
The Government of fndio hos introduced reforms to qttroct Foreign Direct
fnvestment (FDI) in retqil industry. The government hos opproved 5L per cent FDI
in multi-brqnd retqil ond increosed FDf limit to 100 per cenl (from 5l per cent) in
single brond retqil.
fncreosing porticipotion from f oreign ond privote ployers hos given o boost to
fndion retoil industry. fndio's price competitiveness ottrocts large retoil ployers to
use it os o sourcing bose ond ore olso slowly moving from third-porty buying.offices
to establishing thein own wholly-owned/wholly-monoged sourcing ond buying offices.
Tha recent developments in the Kornotoko with regord to Retoil Trode
Enterprises are noteworthy. Retoil distribution centre provides o crucicl, dynamic,
ond evolving link 5etween producers qnd consumers qcross the Stqte. Retqil
--eit-9-rPflssx -qpsr-t-..fr.o-n-tfreir signif icant contributiqn.,-t.q. b-USine-SS-..s.E-tivity- qn-d ED-P
mokes o substontiol contribution to employment.
2. Need for Retoil Trode Policy:
f
The gross stqte domestic product (6SDP) of Kornotoko at current prices wos
Rs. 6,14,607 tore'in 2013-14 ond occounted fon 5.86 per cent of fndio's 6DP. Bosed
on the phenomenol growth in the retail enterprise in Kqrnotokq qnd considering the
potentiol it offers to boost the economy, the Stote Government is desirous of
formulqting o Retoil Trade Policy to look into the business of ietqil in o holistic
monner, propel retoil in Kornotako, creote employment opportunities, is in line with
the notionol ond globol developments.
A. Key Drivers of the Policy :
a) Creation of employmenf opporfunities
b) Promoting grass-roof entrepreneursh ip
c) Empowerment of women 
1
d) Enpowernent of farmers <
e) Create Demand and supiofrt indusfries nanufacfuring Made in fndia'
commodities.
f) Orowth of tllicro, Sncilland fuledium Enferprises (MSl4Es) in refail
trade
fl entnfu-ttion fo Excheguer
h) Enable sfable prbes and offer greafer variety fo consumers

B. Definition:
The Retoil Trode Enterprises:
The enterprises engoged in retoiling of goods and services folt into vcrious
segments, which include food ond grocery, opporel, footwear, consumer dunqbles,
home opplionces ond eguipment, restqurqnts, cinemo hclls, multiplexes, home
furnishing qnd furniture, Sewellery, books, mus.ic, wctches, phormoceuticqls, beouty
ond heofthcqre. These enterprises sell vqnious colegories of items & services ond
use multiple chonnels including brick and mortor/physical store/in-store/ off-line,
direct selling, online/ e-commer ce/ e-tailing ond other chqnnels.
The Retoiler:
'hny entity thct sells goods or provides servic e to the ultimqte consumer. The
ultimote consumer is one who buys these goods for personol use'or consumption. The
retailer therefore is one who deols with the end consumers, mointcins dotq of
daAfng 'r'/iili suali end consumeii ond ii ilsponiib6 f# ihi,e-siii:v:iii d;;ii;i-t; ;ti;
end consumer.
The sole of such goods con hoppen over vqrious chonnels including - brick-
ond-mortor, direct sel'ling, e-c6mherce, television, mobile phones or tqblets, ond
other channels. Any entity or brond that portroys itself as q store , retsiler or seller.
to the end consumer ond thereby creotes q service expectation in the mind of the
consuner would be termeA os q retoiler."
"Multi-brond Retoil" or "supermqrket" or "Hypernorket" is where mony
items ore sold under o single roof.
"Single Erand Retoiler" is the one who sells its own bronded goods qcross its
own outfets. Single-brond retoiler owns whole supply choin ond is the rnomrfocturer,
pocker, importer ond wholesoler of oll goods.
r
d
!_

, !- -.;--_.,-a-a: a-: : - :,:-l'-? 
-'.|
3. Vision, llAission ond Objectives of Retoil Trqde Policy, 2Ot5
A. Vision:
To create an efficient and seamless internal trade opportunity and fo
boost fhe economic competifiveness of the Sfate Econony by promoting and
facilifating world class logistics and warehouse Chain, ninimizing wastage and
transacfion cosf within the retail enferprise, giving fhe best value for noney
to fhe ultinafe consumer while at fhe same tine maximizing returns to fhe
producf, particularly farmers and Sl4Es.
B. Mission:
'a
To prepare sfrategies fo provide a globally competitive and
susfainable investment environmenf, thereby naking Karnafaka one of the
nqgt- fsvesred pll-a9n.l-c- nggr-e.t-r- grd c-gr
within fhe counfry and the globe.
C . Obiectives:
.-
a) To boosf Karnafakas posifion in the Petail Trade within the counfry.
b) To furfher accelerafe invesfment flow to underde.veloped regions of
the Stafe.
c) To creafe large local employnent opportunities to educafe the youfh of
allsections of the sociefy across the region, especially in ruralareas.
d) To leverage Retail Trade as a tool for socio-econonic developnenf of
the State.
4. Policy Initiotives:
Modern retoil prorlides employment opportunities to the educoted unernployed
youth qs well qs thosL who ore not very literate snd / or ere economicolly bockword.
ft ofso helps the growth or ponsumption ond demand by creating a conducive
environment for the consumers.o
Retailing supports considerqble investment by the public ond privote sectors
in urbon renewol by p;"oviding shopping focilities to 1*re residents. Development of
retoif cfusters also fosters cultural, civic qnd"economic development of remote qreos
of the stote.

This is clso importqnt in the context of tourisrn. These srnqller towns ond
vilfoges then serve to develop surrounding rurql er<<rs by providing o range of
fqcil ities qnd services.
The rrcture ond scsle of retoiling in Kcrnctqkq hqs qlso undergone mojor
chonges. moinly driven 6y economic devefopment qnd qlso by chonges within the
industry itself. Specific retoil plonning requirements sre to be met by regionol
quthorities ond plonning outhorities in the stqte of Kcrnotokq to cqrry out their
regi onof pf onning ond development funct ions r espectiv ely .
Voriety ol initiotives needs to be introduced to provide o conducive
environment for the growth of the retqil enterprise. To qllow the retqil enterprise
in the stqte to cchieve its true potentiol, some exceptions qnd re{qxqtions in the
current regulotory frornework need to.be provided.
The folloyirg key initiotives ore pnoposed in the Retoil Trode Policy ZOLS
"" A. Appointment of nodol office in Governrnent of Kqrnqtoko to fccilitote
:ipl_"__WiqCgt,_ _c!_9srq!9.e_ _._, : .
B: Simplification of lobor lows i'Relaxofions of rules under the Shops
ond €stqb.lishment Act with re4ard to working hours, work shifts and
employment of port-tirne workers qnd mqint ensnce of records.
c. rnclusiori of Food qifi grocery'Retoiling in 'essentiol' services - No
interruption of services during industriol action / civic unrest. (ESMA)
D. Relqxotion of stocking limit under €ssentiol Comnodities Act.
(Esscom) on c cgse to cose bosis depending on the porticulor
. circumstonce prevciling of thot time.
E. Promotion of Humon Resourciz Development and Skill Deve{opment in
. the refoil enterprise.
F. Progmotic irnplernentotion of Pcckcaed commodities Regulotions.
G. Creqtion of PEZ{Retoil Entertoinment Zones )
H. Treotirg Distribution Centres at por with indusfrries
I. fndustriol spcces within the confines of cities
J. Electronic Bills , t
5

.-3.j
.-.)
A. Appointment of nodol office in Government of Kornotoko to focilitote single
window cleorcnce
Visvesvoroyo Trode Promotion Centre (VTPC), a society under Commerce &
Industries Deportment will 6e the nodol ogency to look after the interesfs of the
retoil enterprise. The nodol office sholl coordinote with oll the deportments ond
ministries of Kornotoko vis-q-vis centrql Government ond members of industry to
speed up licensing development ond growth of retoil enterprise. Provide o singla
window cleorance mechonism for smoll ond orgonized retail industry of the Stqte.
The nodol office sholl lioise with the relevont licensing outhorities in the stote, on
behoff of the retoiler, so thot these licenses moy be procured. fqster.
B. Simplificotion of lobor lows - Reloxotions of rules under the Shops ond
Eslnblishment Act with regord to working hours,' work shifts ond
ployment of port-.time workers ond mcintenonce of records-
.Relaxotions.of-..r:ules..unden...tha..Shops.ond-.EstablishmenlAct-udlhragond-fo.-r,uo.r:kin9
hours, work shifts ond employment of port time workers ond mointenonce of
records.
Retoil enterprise sholl b-e sllowed to stoy oPen eve?y doy of the yeor to
cater to the needs of the working closs ond other closs of customers
provided thbt the employees qre given compulsory weekly offs on o
preferentiol bosis.
Retoil enterprise daling in oll goods ond commodities sholl be ollowed to
operotebetween 5 o.m. ond 11 P.m.
Women employees sholl be permitted to work beyond 8.30 p.m., provided
precoutions ore token for ensuring their sofety. during such time and
provisions mode for dropping them to their respective homes in the event
they work till lote in the night. The decision sholl remqin with the
respectiv e f emqle employee os to whether she chooses to work such shifts
or not. 
i
Retqif eqtelprise sholl 6& exempted from mointoining physiccl records for
attendonce'qnd,sqlory.rProvision'for Retqil enterpiise'tamoinfoiniemployee-
relsted recordE reguired under vorious lqbour lows in electr.onic form, qnd
to occ.ept returns in electronic form will be mode in line with the pr€ress
of cornputerizotion in the Lobour Deportment,Governmenf of Karnotqko.
ll
ill
lv.

v. Retoil enterprise shall hqve cn option for self-certificotion and filing of
consolidoted qnnuql returns under various Acts odrninistered by the Lqbour
Deportme nt, Government of Kqrnotakq.
vi. option to employ housewives qnd students on pcnf-time bosis.
Retoil enterprise con offer pcrt-time employment to such individuqls,
provicled the worker is not reody to work full time. For this purpose, the
consent of the worker sholl be tqken bef ore hqnd. Minirnurn per hour wqe
rqte sholl be proportionctely determined in qccordonce with minimum
monthly wage rcte specified under minimum wages qct. ft will be exqmined
whether these port timers moy be exempted from other lows. The retoil
unit connot engage more than 25%of its ernployees os port time employees.
C. fncfusion of Food ond Grocery Retoiling in 'essentiol' services (ESMA) - No
interruption of services durlng industriol oction / civic unrest.
Food ond Grocery Retcilerg .gllg.9-tf-rgl.tg-C-..1h9 r-qsp-qn-s-ibility..-o-f-.delive.r.ing. cer.f-sin...
services to citizens which, if obstructed, sff ect the normql lif e of people.
Sometimes occurr€nces like bondhs result in compulsory shutting of retoil
estoblishments. This leods to {'sruption .of product occess to citizens on the one
hond ond huge wostage of produce on the other hand for retoilers qnd ultimotely to
the nation
Food snd Grocery Business.retoil sholl be included under the Ksrnqtoko Essentiol
Services Mqintenqnce Act os'Essentiiil"services'considering the need of thesociety
ot forge in view of the chonged working timings ond lifestyle.
D. Reloxation of stocking limit
on o cose to cose bosis
prevoiling ot thot tirne.
under Essentiol Commodifies Act. (Essconr)
depending on the porticulor circumstonce
0
0
wif'l repal order issued under Essentiol
Ministry of Food
Commodities Act.
ond Civil Supolies
tr'
i
1t
1j
7

As per the direction received from the Ministry of Consumer Affoirs, Food ond
Public Distribution, Government of Indiq Vide circulqr no S-t6/02/2015-ECR&E
doted lgth April, 2OL5 to oll the Stote Government ond the Union Territories of
fndio which stqtes:
"fhe Cenfral governmenf is of fhe view that Retailer of tttultiple Ouflef or
Large Deparfmental Refailers / Sfores may be exempfed fron fhe
purview of sfock holding limits, for the guanfity fo be sfocked for sale
fhrough the tl4ultiple ouflets and Departmenfal Sfores to keep prices of
essential commodities under confrol. This exempfion may apply to all the
essential commodifies scheduled under fhe Essenfial Comnodifies Act,
1955. Therefore, it is advised fhat the Petailer (l4ultiple Outlet) and
Departmenfal Refailers may be considered for exemption fron stock
limits while submitting a proposal to the Central 6overnmenf."
fn line with the direction received from the Centrol Governrnent in the obove soid
-e.inqul-qn.-lh.a.stocki.nE--l.imits prescribed under vqrisu$ Esse-nti.q.l..C-qmm.odities..o.r-dens
will be'removed on q cqse to cose bosis depending on the porticulor circumstonce
prevoiling ot fhat time.
+
E. Promotion of Humon Resource Development ond Skill Development in the
retoil enterprise.
Speciol emphosis hos been given to the development of humon resources ond skill
devefopment f or the Retoil industry, porticulorly in new e?o of high'potentiol.
The Stqte run ogencies ond the renowned privote institutions will institute troining-
bqsed certificotion ond plocement progrommes. They would colloborote with
Retqilers Associotion of fndio ond other ossociotions os well qs the locol retqil
industry to understond their resource requirements. Bosed on these requirements, o
merit bqsed, defined certificqtion and placement procedure shqll be instituted so
thot oppropriote mqnpower is creofed for the retail enterprise. This is porticu{orly
importont for smqll enterprises which qre not in position to import the required
troining in-house. 
:
-.4
Bosed on qn ossessment of ?eosibility ond other detoils by.the tosk force
constituted under the Empowere, Committee, proposql will 6e prepored for the
estobfishment of cenire of excellence ond reseorch ond development furnishing
schools ond other enployment orientad centres.

Centre of Excellencei
Centre of excellence would 6e set up with privote portnership for which Govt. will
provide 50% finsnciol qssistonce towqrds copitol expenditure. The centre will hove q
finishing ocodemy-cum-incubqtion centre. Visvesvoroyo Trode Promotion Centre
(VTPC) will toke on initiotive in this cspect.
F. Pragmotic rmplementotion of Pqckaged cornmodities Regulotions
i. Lobel declorotions of pre-pockaged commodities: Most of the SKUs
(stock keeping units) / commodities stocked ond sold by retoilers ore in
pre-pockoged form, which need to be compliont with the lobel
declqrotions, provisions of the Legal Metrology Act, 2OO9 ond the Legal
Metrology (Pockaged Cornmodities) Rules, lOLl. Thus oll pre-pockoged
commodities shou{d hove certqin declarations os specif ied by the Act &
Rules.
ii. Retqilers in general, ond orgonized retoilers iri' porticulor, deol
number of products bought from hundreds of vendors. sometimes
items moy not corry qll the reguisite declorotions os mondoted or Ihere
could be o mis-print. These happen from the side of the monufocturers,
importers, or pockers.
iii. Not hoving mqndotorf aZcUrotions on the lobels is detrinrentel to
consumer interest. Logicolly in such cqses, liobility for offences should be
cgoinst monufocturers, importers, or pockers. Becouse, the former hove
full control in the -printing of 'lcbels on products, ond the qssocioted
declarqtions mondated by Low.
iv. Under Section 53 (1) of Legal lVletrology Act 2009, stote governments Gre
empowered to moke rules, ofter consultation 'with the Centrql
Gouernment, to ccrry out the provisions of this Act.
v. Section 53(2) of the Legal AAetrology Act 2QO9 lists the mqtters on which
Rules moy be provided. Clouse (f) of grbsection 2 of Section 53 provides
thot StoteGovernment mfy mqke rules pertoining to the motters of ,"f e.e
for compounding of offehces under subsection (1) of Section 48". This
incfudes f e.e for compouhding of offznces under Section 36 of Liit Act.
with
a few
9

vi. As per Section 36 of the Legal AAetrology Act ?Q09 lists the penolty for
selltng, etc., of o pre-pockoged qommodity which does not conform to the
declorotions on the pockoges.
vii. The Stote Government sholl comeout with o notificotion rotionolizing the
onus / octions / fines for non-complionce under section 36 of provisions of
the Legal Metrology Act 2009, ond the rules mode there under to be
token ogoinst the Monufocturer / Packer / Tmporter os per the provisions
of the Act ond its rules, ond / or ogoinst the wholesoler / retoiler for the
first ond subseguent offences, if ony. The wholesale / retoil deoler from
whom goods hovebeen found or seized will be made c porty or witness so
os to establish the cose ogoinst the Monufocturer / Pocker / Tmporter.
G. Retofl Entertoinment Zone (REZ):
The orgonized retoil built-up spoce supply in 2013 in the country wos obout
o,al millien ffH-qre !r'el-"r"1 -w-his-h.i: -e -ryhspp-ing rnsr-ee.:-- eI 79 p?t ee\!.insrg-st-e.ster
tne totot molr oriti-.p tp".; ilppit ;i"jr;i o.t5 miiffi il ^.- i^ zoii o:;J-ii;;
demond for spoce for orgonized retail will be ever increosing in the coming yeqrs
moinly due to urbqnizotion ond opening up of morkets.
The Stote Government shqlI recognize the need for shopping ond recreotionol
creos to cre,ote. much needed bolqnce in urban ploces 5etween residentiol,
commerciql, indusfriol, shopping ond recreotionol oreas.
Efforts.will be 
^oa-" for providing retoil oreqs with direct access to mass
pubf ic tronsport systems,; secure o troff ic plon designed for the long term; secu?e
of f year round electricity , woter, gos, sewoge ond fT connections.
A. Zones for Retoil in Moster Plonning:
The AAoster Plqns by oll plgnning oufhorities in Stqte will resei;ve {qnd for
retoil development. This*ryould help the industry in the following rrunner:
i) The large internotionof stondord mqlls reguire lorger lond porcels, with
eqrmorked spoces i6r4oster plons would help in roising the stqndqrd of
development.
ii) The infrostrricture on the roqd, public tronsportotion, power ond other'
fronts csn be plonned in odvance cccordingly.

tr:--;tu-)-\ ;-.,r:,:, u, :,.:. - ^:2
B. Development Regulotions (DR)
The DR governs retqil developme nt largely ds per the norms governin g the
commerciql office development. The business use qnd reguirements ere
diff erent for the retoil development qnd hence there is o need to incorporote
such specif ic business needs. The following modif icqtions would enhonc e the
viobility ond guolity of developrnent for: retoil centres.
i) Ground Coveroge - Restriction on the ground coverage for retqil
developnents to 6e removed subject to zonrng regurotion.
ii) Floor to Floor Heigfrfs -.Retoil developments will be ollowed o floor to
floor height of up to 5.5 meters.
iii) Infrostructure Support ' The rood qnd public tronsport infrostructure
needs to be upgroded oround retoil developments to support additionol
pri5fic--niovamanT.-Torf-Tf:'Tai-;onillerotion generoting from these
devefopments should to be directed towards improvem ent of infrqstructure
orou nd--t h ese dev elopments.
iv) Buifding Height - Theie i3 o height restriction of 30 meters for buildings
which house q multiplex or ouditorium. Alternate commerciol use like hote{s,
service oportrnent, offices ar€ compulsorily (frorn o viobility point of view)
required to be developted on the upper f Joors this increqses the height of
the building. The restriction on building heights will be relaxed Gs per
norms.
v) Porking Norms - The retoil enterprises depending on the format, size ond
focqtion receive large number of vehicles and limited occess to porking
results in trqffic snqrls oround the spoce. The retoil entities would be
encouraged to provide qdditionql porking spoces within their oreo ond such
consfructions ccn be ollowed os per reguirement without FAR colculqtions.
l{
'rdL
1t

H. Treoting Distribution Centres ot por with industries
Wqrehouses qnd distribution centres used by retoilers ond troder5 qre locotions
thot qid industry qnd commerce. They olso provide employment opportunities.
These estqblishments need to be promoted in order to develop o robust ond on
efficient logistic set up. Such q set up would help reduce wostoge. This olso
helps in reducing wostoge. Recognition of fhis octivity is qn essential bockbone
of retoil ond consumption in the stqte. Distribution centers sholl 6e recogntzed
in por with the service industry.
With the entry of mony conglomerotes into the orgonized retail "sector, the
fndioh wqrehousing londscope is getting redefined from the conventionol concept
of 'godown' - o mere four-wqll-ond-shed - to modern set ups thot.focilitqte
better stock movement ond reduction in product wostoge, especiolly food. This
is:. 'ochieved - wifh- -high'-1ards--'oF--qutomation;--multi=rqck-and:polletizafion;---"
infrostructure, etc. However the prereguisite is the qvqilqbility of 'fqcilitoting
spqce.
up their worehouses within
o significont portion of the
The Government will olso look qt o policy encouroging setting up of world clqss
Wqrehouses on PPP bosis.
I. Industriol spoces within the confines of cities
fn cities with o populotion of more thon 1 million, retoil outlets sholl be qllowed
to be set in ploces qllocoted for industries within city limits, since this promotes
commerce ond propogotes comme?ce ond employment.
J. Electronic bills
I
Consideri ng themulti-chon#l ,."norio ond the needto sove pqper qnd increose
troceqbility of trqnsoctions, qll kinds of retoilers sholl be qllowed to issue bills
(tox invoices) to the consumer in on electronic mode ond thereby replocing the
physicol printing of pcper.
Government will ollow qnd€,neourage retoilers to set
industriql iiies. Agriculture produce contributes to
merchqndise sold in retoil stores.

ii i)
B. Development Regulotions (DR)
The DR governs retqil development lorgely ds per the norms governin g the
commerciol offtce development. The business use qnd reguirements a|e
drfferent for the retqil development ond hence there is o need to incorporote
such specific business needs. The following modificotions would enhonce the
vicbility ond guolity of development for retail centres.
i) 6round Coveroge - Restriction on the ground coverage for retqil
developments to be removed subject to zoning regulotion.
ii) Floor to Floor Heiglrts - Retoil developments will be ollowed o floor to
floor height of up to 5.5 ineters.
fnfrostructure Support = The rood qnd public tronsport infrqstructure
needs to be upgraded qround retoil developments to support additionol
public--motamenTlPb-rf=-6T. '-tqi--ioniiderotion generoting f rom ih';;;'
developments should to be directed towords improvement of infrqstructure
orou nd.-t h ese dev elopments.
Buifding Height - Theie i3 o height restriction of 30 meters for buildings
which house q multiPlex or quditorium. Alternale commerciol use like hotels,
service oportment, offices are compulsorily (frorn o viobility point of view)
reguired fo be deve,loped on the upper floors this increqses th€ heighf of
the building. The restriction on building heights will be relaxed cs per
norms.
Pcrking Norms - The retoil enterprises depending on the formqt, size qnd
locotion receive lorge nurnber of vehicles ond limited occ€ss to porking
results in troffic snqrls oround the spoce. The retoil entities would be
encouragzd to provide odditionol porking spoces within their areo ond such
constructions con be qllowed os per reguirement without FAR colculations.
{
.1 dt
iv)
v)
1-1

' 5. Implementotion AAechqnism
A High Level Empowered Committee under the Chairmonship of Chief Secretary
ofong with ACSlPrincipcl Secretqries/Secretories of line deportments will be
constituted to monitor the progress of implementqtion of cll the provisions of the
policy regulorly.
The composition of the empowered committ ee will be qs follows:
sl.
No.
Nome ond Designotion of Offrcer
Rernorks
1
Chief Secretary,GoK
Choirperson
2
Addl. (A.ief Secretary/Principol Secretcry to GovI., C&T
D+t.
Member
3
Addl. Chief Secretory/Principol Se*etary/ Setetary to
6ovt., Urbon Development Dept.
ilt\enber
4
Addl. Chief Secretary/Principol Secretory to 6oW., Lobour
Dept.
Member
5
Addl. Chief Secretary/Principol Setretory to 6ovt., Higher
C),,^^+i^^ 
l\^-r'
il\ember
u-v
6'
Addl. Chief Secrefory/Principol Secretory to Govt., Finonce
Dept.
Member
7
Addl. Chief Secretory/Principol Secretory to 6ovt., Food,
Civil Supplies & Corlsunpr dffqirs Dept.
.lAember
8
Commissioner for Industriol Development ond Director of
fndustries & Commerce
Mernber
9
Nominee.of Retqilers Associotion of Indio
Member
10
Monoging Direcfor. Visvesvcroiqh Trcde Promotion Centre
Member
Secretory
This Committee cqn co-opt other members and /or constitute sub groups/ tcsk
force to focilifote srrrooth inrplementqtion of theRetoil Trcde Policy 2Ot5.
This Committe-e will be qssisted by q Retail Trode Policy" Monitoring Cell /
Outsourced Professionql agency in VTPC. This cell will hove r{eguisite stoff cnd
resourc€s to conducf resr.nrch, undertake studies, su'rveys, etc to ossess
inpoct of policy initiqtives ond provide relevont feedbqck rqarding the policy
qnd its implementotion. &
detailrzdin this pdi,gy qnd'its decision shdl be finol.
13

6. Vclidity of Policy
This Retoil Trqde Policy sholl cohe in to effect from the dote of issue of
Government Order ond will be valid for a period of five yeors or till o new poficy is
onnounced.
T
I
0
J
t
'.4
!.
