
1
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1.
Short title, and Commencement.
-6
2.
Definitions –
-6 
CHAPTER II 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PACKAGES INTENDED 
FOR RETAIL SALE 
3.
Applicability of the Chapter –
-9 
4.
Regulation for pre-packing and sale etc. of commodities in packaged form
-9 
5.
Specific commodities to be packed and sold in recommended standard packages
-10 
6.
Declarations to be made on every package
-11 
7.
Principal display panel-its area, size and letter etc.
-18 
8.
Declaration where to appear
-21 
9.
Manner in which declaration shall be made
-22 
10.
Declaration of name and address of the manufacturer, etc.
-22 
11.
General provisions relating to declaration of quantity
-23 
12.
Manner in which declaration of quantity shall be
-24 
13.
Statement of units of weight, measure or number
-25 
14.
Declarations with regard to dimensions of certain commodities
-26 
15.
Declaration with regard to dimensions and weight to be made on packages in certain cases
-26 
16.
Declarations to be made with regard to the number of usable sheets to be stated
-26 
17.
Declarations with regard to the dimensions of container type Commodities
-27 
18.
Provisions relating to wholesale dealer and retail dealers
-27 

 
 
2
19.  
Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the manufacturer or packer 
-29 
20.  
Action to be taken on completion of inspection of packages at the premises of the 
manufacturer or the packer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-32 
21.  
Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the wholesale dealer or 
retail dealer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-33 
22.  
Establishment of maximum permissible error on package  
 
 
 
 
-34 
23.  
Deceptive packages to be repacked or in default to be seized  
 
 
 
-34 
CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO WHOLESALE PACKAGE 
24.  
Declarations applicable to be made on every wholesale package   
 
 
 
-35 
    CHAPTER IV 
EXPORT OF PACKAGED COMMODITIES 
25.  
Restrictions on sale of export packages in India   
 
 
 
 
 
-35 
CHAPTER V 
EXEMPTIONS 
26.  
Exemption in respect of certain packages  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-35 
CHAPTER VI 
REGISTRATION OF MANUFACTURERS, PACKERS AND IMPORTERS 
27.   Registration of manufacturers, packers and importers   
 
 
 
 
-36 
28.  
Registration of shorter address permissible   
 
 
 
 
 
 
-37 
29.   Registration of manufacturers and packers, etc.   
 
 
 
 
 
-37 
30.  
Compilation of lists of manufacturers or packers and their circulation   
 
 
-37 

 
 
3
CHAPTER VII 
GENERAL 
31.  
32.  
Fine for contravention of Rules    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-39 
32A.  Sum of compounding of offences   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-39 
33.  
Power to relax  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-39 
34.  
Repeal and savings   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-40 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
 
TABLE-I 
I.Maximum permissible errors on net quantity declared by weight or volume  
 
 
-40  
TABLE-II –  
II. The maximum permissible errors on net quantities declared by length, area or number  
-41 
  
 
 
 
 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
Declaration of quantity in relation to commodities   
 
 
 
 
 
 
-44 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
Exceptions referred to in Rule 12(2)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-44  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
Manner of Selection of Sample Packages   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-46 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities contained in Packages   
 
 
-47 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4
Part-I – Equipment 
1. 
Equipments required - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-47 
2. 
Working standards to be ordinarily used   
 
 
 
 
 
 
-47 
Part-II - Instructions with regard to the determination of quantity and error at 
manufacturer's or packer's premises. –  
 
                        
 
 
 
-48 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
Form A 
 Weight Checking – Data Sheet         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-51 
 
 
Form B 
Volume/ Length Checking – Data Sheet    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 7th March, 2011 
 
GSR 202 (E).-- In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) read with 
clause (j) and (q) of sub-section (2) of section 52 of the Legal Metrology Act 2009, 
(1 of 2010), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
 
1. Short title, and Commencement.- 
(1)These rules may be called The Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011. 
(2) They shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 2011. 
 
2. Definitions:- 
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires- 
(a) “Act” means the Legal Metrology Act 2009, (1 of 2010); 
 
*(aa) “Consumer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in **clause (7) 
of section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019). (**clause 
(d) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 
1986 omitted); 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018.  
**Substituted vide GSR 779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 
1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022). 
 
(b) “dealer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form, means a person who, 
or a firm which carries on directly or otherwise, the business of buying, selling, 
supplying or distributing any such commodity whether for cash or for deferred 
payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, and 
includes a commission agent who carries on such business on behalf of any 
principal, but does not include a manufacturer who manufactures any commodity 
which is sold or distributed in a packaged form except where such commodity is 
sold by such manufacturer to any other person other than a dealer ; 
*(bb) “industrial consumer” means the consumer who buys packaged 
commodities directly from the manufacturer or from an importer or from 
wholesale dealer for use by that industry and the package shall have declaration 
‘not for retail sale’;  
*(bc) “institutional consumer” means the institution who hires or avails of the 
facilities or services in connection with transport, hotel, hospital or other 
organisation which buy packaged commodities directly from the manufacturer or 
from an importer or from wholesale dealer for use by that institution, and the 
package shall have declaration ‘not for retail sale’; 

 
 
6
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015.  
**‘(bc) “institutional consumer” means the institution which buys packaged 
commodities bearing a declaration ‘not for retail sale’, directly from the 
manufacturer or from an importer or from wholesale dealer for use by that 
institution and not for commercial or trade purposes;’ 
 
**Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
***‘(bd) “E-commerce” means buying and selling of goods and services including 
digital products over digital and electronic network;  
 
***(be) “E-commerce entity” means a company incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 1956 or the companies Act, 2013 or a foreign company covered 
under clause (42) of   section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, or an office, branch 
or agency in India covered under sub-clause (ii) of clause (v) of section 2 of the 
foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) owned or controlled by a 
person resident outside India and conducting e-commerce business; 
 
***(bf) “marketplace based model of e-commerce” means providing of an 
information technology platform by an e-commerce entity on a digital and 
electronic network to act as a facilitator between buyer and seller;’ 
***Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, 
came into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
(c) “lot” means –  
(i) in the case of packages which have been stored, the total number of such 
packages stored; and  
(ii) in the case of packages which are on or at the end of the packing line, the 
maximum hourly output of packages;’ 
(d) “manufacturer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form, means a 
person who or a firm which produces, makes or manufactures such commodity 
and includes a person or firm which puts, or causes to be put, any mark on any 
packaged commodity, not produced, made or manufactured by him or it, and the 
mark claims the commodity in the package to be commodity produced, made or 
manufactured by such person, firm as the case may be; 
(e) “'Maximum permissible error”, in relation to the quantity contained in an 
individual package, means an error in deficiency which, subject to the provision 
of these rules, does not exceed  the limits specified in the First Schedule; 
(f) “net quantity”, in relation to commodity contained in a package, means the 
quantity by weight, measure or number of such commodity contained in that 
package, excluding the packaging or wrapper; 
(g) “packer” means a person who, or a firm which pre-packs any commodity, 
whether in any bottle, tin, wrapper or otherwise, in units suitable for sale whether 
wholesale or retail; 

 
 
7
(h) “principal display panel”, in relation to a package, means the total surface 
area of the package where the information required under these rules are to be 
given in the following manner, namely:- 
      (i) all the information could be grouped together and given at one place; or  
      (ii) the pre-printed information could be grouped together and given in one 
place and on line information grouped together in other place; 
(i) “quantity” in relation to commodity contained in a package, means the quantity 
by weight, measure or number of such commodity contained in that package; 
(j) “retail dealer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form means a dealer 
who directly sells such packages to the consumer and includes a wholesale dealer 
who makes such direct sale to the consumer. 
(k) “retail package” means the packages which are intended for retail sale to the 
ultimate consumer for the purpose of consumption of the commodity contained 
therein and includes the imported packages : 
*Provided that for the purposes of this clause, the expression 'ultimate consumer' 
shall not include industrial or institutional consumers; 
* Omitted vide GSR 359(E) dated 6th June, 2013.  
**Provided that for the purposes of “retail food package”, the definition of the 
same contained in the rules or regulations made under the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) shall apply. 
** Substituted vide GSR 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015. 
(l) “retail sale”, in relation to a commodity, means the sale, distribution or delivery 
of such commodity through retail sales shops,  agencies or other instrumentalities 
for consumption by an individual or a group of individuals or any other consumer; 
(m) “retail sale price” means the maximum price at which the commodity in 
packaged form may be sold to the consumer and the price shall be printed on the 
package in the manner given below; 
'Maximum or Max. retail price Rs...../
...... inclusive of all taxes or in the form 
MRP Rs...... / 
...... incl., of all taxes after taking into account the fraction of less 
than fifty paise to be rounded off to the preceding rupee and fraction of above 
50 paise and up to 95 paise to the rounded off to fifty paise;  
 
*(m) “retail sale price” means the maximum price at which the commodity in 
packaged form may be sold to the consumer inclusive of all taxes;’  
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
(n) “section” means a section of the Act; 
(o) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to these rules; 
(p) “standard package” means a package containing the specified quantity of a 
commodity; 
(q) “wholesale dealer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form means a 
dealer who does not directly sell such commodity to any consumer but distributes 
or sells such commodity through one or more intermediaries; 
(r) “wholesale package” means a package containing- (i)  a number of retail 
packages, where such first mentioned package is intended for sale, distribution 

 
 
8
or delivery to an intermediary and is not intended for sale direct to a single 
consumer; or 
(ii) a commodity sold to an intermediary in bulk to enable such intermediary to 
sell, distribute or deliver such commodity to the consumer in smaller  quantities; 
or 
 (iii) ten or more than ten retail packages provided that the retail packages are 
labeled as required under the rules.  
(s) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Act, 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.  
 
CHAPTER –II 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PACKAGES INTENDED FOR RETAIL SALE 
3. Applicability of the Chapter.- The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply 
to,-  
(a) packages of commodities containing quantity of more than 25 kg or 25 litre 
excluding cement and fertilizer sold in bags up to 50 kg; and 
(b) packaged commodities meant for industrial consumers or institutional 
consumers. 
*Explanation :- For the purpose of this rule,- 
i) “institutional consumer” means the institutional  consumer like transportation, 
Airways, Railways, Hotels, Hospitals or any other service institutions who buy  
packaged commodities directly from the manufacturer for use by that institution; 
ii) “industrial consumer” means the industrial consumer who buy packaged  
commodities directly from the manufacturer for use by that industry. 
* Omitted vide GSR 359(E) dated 6th June, 2013. 
 
*“3. Application of Chapter.- The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to- 
 
(a) packages of commodities containing quantity of more than 25 kilogram or 25 
litre;  
 
(b) cement, fertilizer and agricultural farm produce sold in bags above 50 
kilogram; and 
 
(c) packaged commodities meant for industrial consumers or institutional 
consumers.”. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, w.e.f. 
1.1.2018. 
 
4. Regulation for pre-packing and sale etc. of commodities in packaged 
form. – *(1) On and from the commencement of these rules, no person shall 
pre-pack or cause or permit to be pre-packed any commodity for sale, distribution 
or delivery unless the package in which the commodity is pre-packed bears 
thereon or on a label is securely affixed thereto, such declarations as are required 
to be made under these rules. 

 
 
9
Explanation.- The existence of packages without the declaration of retail sale 
price within the manufacturer’s premises shall not be construed as a violation of 
these rules and it shall be ensured that all packages leaving the premises of 
manufacturer for their destination shall have declaration of retail sale price on 
them as required in this rule.  
 
*(2)  When  one  or  more  packages  intended  for  retail  sale  are  
grouped  together  for  being  sold  as  a  retail package on promotional 
offer, every package of the group shall comply with provisions of rule 6. 
 
** Substituted vide GSR 779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 
1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022).. 
 
 
5. Specific commodities to be packed and sold in recommended 
standard packages. – *(1) The commodities specified in the Second Schedule 
shall be packed for sale, distribution or delivery in such standard quantities as are 
specified in that Schedule:  
*Provided that if a commodity specified in the Second Schedule is packed in a 
size other than that prescribed in that Schedule, a declaration that 'Not a standard 
pack size under the Legal Metrology (packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 or 'non 
standard size under the Legal Metrology (packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011' 
shall be made prominently on the label of such package. 
 
*Numbered as rule 5(1) vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 2012. 
**Proviso omitted [vide G.S.R. 784(E) dated 24th October, 2011] come 
into force w.e.f. 1st November, 2012 [vide G.S.R. 426(E) dated 5th June, 
2012]. 
 
$ “Provided that if the Competent Authority under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
(10 of 1955) fixed and notified the standard quantity of any essential commodity, the 
standard quantity of such essential commodities as fixed and notified shall prevail.” 
$ inserted vide G.S.R. 858 (E) dated 7th September, 2016. 
 
           
***(2) When one or more packages intended for retail sale are grouped together 
for being sold as a retail package on Promotional offer, every package of the 
group shall comply with provisions of rule 6.  
***(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Second Schedule, the 
manufacture or importer may sell the value based package in terms of Rs. 1/-, 
Rs. 2/-, Rs. 3/-, Rs. 4/-, Rs. 5/-, Rs. 6/-, Rs. 7/-, Rs. 8/-, Rs. 9/- and Rs. 10/- after 
making the other  Declarations specified in rule 6.  
 
***inserted vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June, 2012. 
 

 
 
10
**Rule 5 omitted vide GSR 779(E) dated dated 2nd November, 2021 
w.e.f. 1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 
28.3.2022).. 
 
 
6.   Declarations to be made on every package. – *(1) Every package shall 
bear thereon or on label securely affixed thereto, a definite, plain and conspicuous 
declaration made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as, to- 
(a) the name and address of the manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is not 
the packer, the name and address of the manufacturer and packer and for any 
imported package the name and address of the importer shall be mentioned. 
Explanation I.- If any name and address of a company is mentioned on the 
label without any qualifying words 'manufactured by' or 'packed by', it shall be 
presumed that such name and address shall be that of the manufacturer and the 
liability shall be determined accordingly;  
Explanation II. - If the brand name and address of the brand owner appear on 
the label as a marketer, then the brand owner shall be held responsible for any 
violation of these rules and action as may be required shall be initiated against 
the deemed manufacturer and in the event of more than one name and address 
appearing in the label, prosecution shall be launched against the manufacturer 
indicated on the label in the first place and not against all of them.  
Explanation III. - *In respect of packages containing food articles, the 
provisions of this sub-rule shall not apply, and instead, the requirement of the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) and the rules made there 
under shall apply. 
* The words “Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954)” 
were replaced by the words “Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 
of 2006)” vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 2012.  
 
*“Explanation III. - In respect of packages containing food articles, the provisions 
of this clause shall not apply, but the provisions of, and the requirements specified 
in the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) and the rules made 
thereunder shall apply;”; 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
* “(aa) The name of the country of origin or manufacture or assembly in case of 
imported products shall be mentioned on the package;”; 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, w.e.f. 
1.1.2018. 
 
(b) The common or generic names of the commodity contained in the package 
and in case of packages with more than one product, the name and number or 
quantity of each product shall be mentioned on the package.  
 

 
 
11
(c) The net quantity, in terms of the standard unit of weight or measure, of the 
commodity contained in the package or where the commodity is packed or sold 
by number, the number of the commodity contained in the package shall be 
mentioned. 
 
(d) The month and year in which the commodity is manufactured $or pre-packed 
or imported shall be mentioned in the package:  
 
*Provided that for packages containing food articles, the provisions of the Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act 1954 (37 of 1954) and the rules made there under shall apply: 
 
* The words “Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954)” 
were replaced by the words “Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 
of 2006)” vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 2012.  
 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall apply in case of packages 
containing seeds which are labeled and certified under the provisions of the Seeds 
Act, 1966 (54 of 1966) and the rules made there under: 
**Provided that a manufacturer may indicate the month and year using a rubber 
stamp without overwriting: 
**The said proviso was omitted vide GSR 784 (E) dated 24th October, 
2011. 
Provided also that for packages containing cosmetics products, the provisions of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall apply.  
 
$the words, -“or pre-packed or imported” shall be omitted vide GSR 
779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 
01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022). 
 
 
*‘(da)  If a package contains a commodity which may become unfit for human 
consumption after a period of time, the ‘best before or use by the date, month 
and year’ shall also be  mentioned on the label: 
 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply if a provision in this regard is made 
in any other law. 
 
Explanation.- 1. For the purposes of this sub-rule,-  
 
(a) the expression “best before” means the date which signifies the end of the 
period under any stated storage conditions during which the product shall remain 
fully marketable and shall retain any specific qualities for which tacit or express 
claims have been made and beyond the date commodity may still be safe for 
consumption; 
 

 
 
12
(b) the expression “Use by Date” means the date which signifies the end of the 
estimated period under any stated storage conditions after which the product 
shall not have the quality attributes normally expected by the consumers and 
after this date, the commodity should not be regarded as marketable.’; 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, w.e.f. 
1.1.2018. 
 
(e) the retail sale price of the package; 
 
*“shall clearly indicate that it is the maximum retail price inclusive of all taxes 
**in Indian currency: and the price in rupees and paise be rounded off to the 
nearest rupee or 50 paise; 
  
Illustrations.- for declaration of retail sale price: 
 
(a) Maximum or Max. retail price Rs. or 
xx.xx  (inclusive of all taxes), or  
(b) Maximum or Max. retail price Rs. or 
 xx.xx inclusive of all taxes, or 
(c) MRP Rs. or 
xx.xx incl. of all taxes, or 
(d) MRP Rs. or 
xx.xx (incl. of all taxes):” 
 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, w.e.f. 
1.1.2018. 
 
**for the words commencing with “and the price in rupees and paisa”, 
and ending with “(d) MRP Rs. ₹ xx.xx(inclusive of all taxes):”, the 
words “in Indian currency”: shall be substituted; vide GSR 779(E) dated 
2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 
226(E) dated 28.3.2022). 
 
 
Provided that for packages containing alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquor, the 
State Excise Laws and the rules made there under shall be applicable within the 
State in which it is manufactured and where the state excise laws and rules made 
there under do not provide for declaration of retail sale price, the provisions of 
these rules shall apply.   
 
* “Provided further that if the retail sale price of any essential commodity is fixed 
and notified by the Competent Authority under the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 the same shall apply.”; 
 *inserted vide G.S.R. 858 (E) dated 7th September, 2016. 
 
(f) Where the sizes of the commodity contained in the package are relevant, the 
dimensions of the commodity contained in the package and if the dimensions of 

 
 
13
the different pieces are different, the dimensions of each such different piece shall 
be mentioned. 
 
(g) such other matter as are specified in these rules: 
 
Provided that -- 
(A) no declaration as to the month and year in which the commodity is 
manufactured or pre-packed shall be required to be made on-- 
(i) any package containing bidi or incense sticks; 
(ii) any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of 14.2kg or 5kg, bottled and 
marketed by a public sector undertaking; 
(B) where any packaging material bearing thereon the month in which any 
commodity was expected to have been pre-packed is not exhausted during that 
month, such packaging material may be used for pre-packing the concerned 
commodity produced or manufactured during the next succeeding month and not 
there after, but the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that such packaging 
material could not be exhausted during the period aforesaid by reason of any 
circumstance beyond the control of the manufacturer or packer as the case may 
be extend the time during which such packaging material may be used, and , 
where any such packaging material is exhausted before the expiry of the month 
indicated thereon, the packaging material intended to be used during the next 
succeeding month may be used for pre-packing the concerned commodity: 
Provided that the said provision shall not apply to the packages containing food 
products, where the 'Best before or Use before' period is ninety days or less from 
the date of manufacture or packing.' 
(C) no declaration as to the retail sale price shall be required to be made on  
(i) any package containing bidi; 
(ii) any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of which the price is covered 
under the Administrative Price Mechanism of the Government. 
Explanation I: The month and the year in which commodity is pre-packed may 
be expressed either in words, or by numerals indicating the month and the year, 
or by both. 
Explanation II: Liquid milk does not include condensed milk. 
* The words “Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954)” 
were replaced by the words “Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 
of 2006)” vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 2012.  
 
(2) Every package shall bear the name, address, telephone number, E-mail 
address, if available, of the person who can be or the office which can be, 
contacted, in case of consumer complaints. 
 
*(2) Every package shall bear the name, address, telephone number, e-mail 
address of the person who can be or the office which can be contacted, in case 
of consumer complaints. 
* Substituted vide GSR 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015 and will be 
effective w.e.f. 1.1.2016, dispensed upto 30.6.2016. 

 
 
14
 
(3) It shall not be permissible to affix individual stickers on the package for 
altering or making declaration required under these rules: 
Provided that for reducing the Maximum Retail Price (MRP), a sticker with the 
revised lower MRP (inclusive of all taxes) may be affixed and the same shall not 
cover the MRP declaration made by the manufacturer or the packer, as the case 
may be, on the label of the package. 
 
(4) It shall be permissible to use stickers for making any declaration other than 
the declaration required to be made under these rules.  
 
*“(4A) Nothing in this rule shall preclude a manufacturer or packer or importer to 
declare the following on the package, in addition to the mandatory declarations- 
 
(a) Barcode or GTIN or QR Code; 
 
(b) ‘e-code’ for net quantity assurance of the commodity and other required 
declarations, after obtaining the same in the manner as specified by the Central 
Government; 
 
(c) logos of Government schemes, such as Swatch Bharat Mission, where such 
use is authorised by the Central Government.”; 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
(5) Where a commodity consists of a number of components and these 
components are packed in two or more units, for sale as a single commodity, the 
declaration required to be made under sub-rule (1) shall appear on the main 
package and such package shall also carry information about the other 
accompanying packages or such declaration may be given on individual packages 
and intimation to that effect may be given on the main package and if the 
components are sold as spare parts, all declarations shall be given on each 
package. 
#(6) Any packaging material or wrapper which could not be exhausted by the 
manufacturer or packer may be used for packing of the material “upto 30th 
September 2011” or till such date the packaging material of wrapper is 
exhausted, whichever is earlier, after making the corrections required under these 
rules by way of stamping or putting sticker or online printing, as the case may be. 
#inserted vide G.S.R. 318(E) dated 13th April 2011. 
## the words “upto 31st March  2012”  were substituted for the words 
“upto 30th September 2011” Vide G.S.R. 734(E) dated 30th September 
2011. 

 
 
15
$(7) Every package containing the genetically modified food shall bear at the top 
of its principle display panel the words “GM”.  
$ inserted vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 2012 and come into force 
w.e.f.1st day of January 2013. 
$$(8) Every package containing soaps, shampoos, tooth pastes and other 
cosmetics and toiletries shall bear at the top of its principal display panel a red 
or, as the case may be, brown dot for products of non-vegetarian origin and a 
green dot for products of vegetarian origin. 
$$ inserted vide G.S.R. 137 dated 15th June 2014 and come into force 
w.e.f.1st day of July 2014. 
$$$(9) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this rule, it shall be 
permissible to affix a label on imported packages for making the declarations 
required under these rules.”. 
$$$ inserted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015 and came into 
force w.e.f. 1.7.2016. 
*“(10) An E-Commerce entity shall ensure that the mandatory declarations as 
specified in sub-rule (1), except the month and year in which the commodity is 
manufactured or packed,  shall be displayed on the digital and electronic network 
used for e-commerce transactions:   
 
Provided that in case of market place model of e-commerce, responsibility of the 
correctness of declarations shall lie with the manufacturer or seller or dealer or 
importer if,-  
 
(a) the function of the e-commerce entity is limited to providing access to a 
communication system over which information made available by the 
manufacturer or seller or dealer or importer is transmitted or temporarily stored 
or hosted; or  
 
(b) the entity does not-  
 
(i) initiate the transmission;  
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission; and  
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;  
 
(c) the entity observes due diligence while discharging its duty as an intermediary 
under the Information Technology Act, 2000 and also observes such other 
guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf:   
 
Provided further that there shall not be any protection to the market place e-
commerce entity if,-  
 

 
 
16
(a) the entity has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats 
or promise of otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act; 
 
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate 
Government or its agency that any information, data or communication link 
residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled by the entity is being 
used to commit the unlawful act, the entity fails to expeditiously remove or disable 
access to that material on that resource without vitiating the evidence in any 
manner.  
 
Explanation.- For the removal of doubts it is hereby clarified that the provision of 
this sub -rule shall not provide exemption from the declarations required to be 
made under these rules on pre-packaged commodities delivered to the 
consumers.”.    
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
$”(11) The unit sale price shall be declared as– 
(i) “Rs. _ per g” for pre-packaged commodities with net quantity of commodity 
less than one kilogram; 
(ii) “Rs. _ per kg” for pre-packaged commodities with net quantity of commodity 
more or equal to one kilogram; 
(iii) “Rs. _ per cm” for pre-packaged commodities with net length of the 
commodity less than one meter; 
(iv) “Rs. _ per meter” for pre-packaged commodities with net length of the 
commodity more or equal to one meter; 
(v) “Rs. _ per number”; 
(vi) “Rs. _ per ml” for pre-packaged commodities with net volume of the 
commodity less than one litre; 
(vii) “Rs. _ per litre” for pre-packaged commodities with net volume of the 
commodity more or equal to one litre.”. 
$$“(11) The unit sale price in rupees, rounded off to the nearest two decimal 
place, shall be declared on every pre-packaged commodities in the following 
manner, namely:- 
(i)  per gram where net quantity is less than one kilogram and per kilogram where 
net quantity is more than one kilogram; 

 
 
17
(ii) per centimeter where net length is less than one metre and per metre where 
net length is more than one metre; 
(iii) per mililitre where net volume is less than one litre and per litre where net 
volume is more than one litre; 
(iv) per number or unit if any item is sold by number or unit: 
              Provided that for packages containing alcoholic beverages or spirituous 
liquor, the State Excise Laws and the rules made thereunder shall be applicable 
within the State in which it is manufactured. 
             Provided further that declaration of unit sale price is not required for the 
pre-packaged commodities in which retail sale price is equal to the unit sale price.” 
$Inserted vide GSR 779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 1.4.2022   
 
$$Inserted vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022 w.e.f. 1.10.2022 
 
“No prosecution shall be initiated against the manufacturer or packer or importer 
of pre packaged commodities for making declaration with effect from the 1st April, 
2022 in accordance with Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, as 
amended by the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Amendment Rules, 
2021 published vide number G.S.R. 779 (E), dated the 2nd November, 2021.” 
$ Substituted vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022 w.e.f. 1.10.2022. 
 
 
7. Principal display panel-its area, size and letter etc.- (1) In the case of a 
package having a capacity of ten cubic centimeters or less, the principal 
display panel may be a card or tape affixed firmly to the package and shall bear 
the required information. 
*for the words ‘five cubic centimeters or less’ the words ‘ten cubic centimeters or 
less’ are substituted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015 
 
 
(2) The height of any numeral in the declaration required under these rules, on 
the principal display panel shall not be less than,- 
(i) as shown in Table-I, if the net quantity is declared in terms of weight or 
volume; 
(ii) as shown in Table-II, if the net quantity is declared in terms of length, area 
or number. 
 
*“(2) The height of any numeral and letter in the declaration required under these 
rules shall be as per Table-I.”; 

 
 
18
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
(3) The height of letters in the declaration shall not be less than 1 mm height and 
when blown, formed, molded, embossed or perforated, the height of letters shall 
not be less than 2 mm. 
Provided that the width of the letter or numeral shall not be less than one third 
of its height, except in the case of numeral `1' and letters (i), (I) and (l); 
 
“(3) The width of the letter or numeral shall not be less than one third of its height 
,except in the case of numeral “1” and letters (i), ( I) and ( );”. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
 
TABLE-I 
Minimum height of numeral 
 
Serial 
Number 
Net quantity in 
weight / volume 
Minimum height in mm 
 
 
Normal case 
When blown , formed
molded, embossed or
perforated on containe
1 
Upto 200g/ ml 
1 
2 
2 
Above 200g/ ml 
and upto 500g/ml 
2 
4 
3 
Above 500g/ ml 
4 
6 
 
 
*“Table-I 
 
Serial 
Number 
Area of Principal display 
panel in square 
centimeters 
(A) 
Minimum height 
of numerals and 
letters in 
millimeters 
Minimum height 
of numerals and 
letters when 
blown, formed  or 
molded on surface 
of container in 
millimeters 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1 
A  <  50 
1.0 
1.5  2.0** 
2 
50 < A  <  100 
1.5 
3.0 
3 
100 < A  <  500 
2.5 
4.0 
4 
500 < A  <  2500 
4.0 
6.0 
5 
2500<A 
6.0 
6.0”; 

 
 
19
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
** Corrected vide GSR 1373(E) dated 7.11.2017. 
 
**TABLE-II 
Minimum height of numeral 
 
Serial 
Number 
 
Net quantity in length, 
area or number,         
area of principal display 
panel  
Minimum height in mm 
 
                    
Normal case 
When blown 
, formed, 
molded, 
embossed or 
perforated 
on container 
1 
Upto 100 cm2 
1 
2 
2 
Above 100 cm2 and 
upto 500 cm2 
2 
4 
3 
Above 500 cm2 and 
upto 2500 cm2 
4 
6 
4 
Above 2500 cm2 
6 
6 
 
** Omitted w.e.f. 01.1.2018, vide an amendment GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 
2017. 
 
(4) The provisions under sub-rule (1) to (3) shall not apply to a package if the 
information to be specified on such package under this rule is also required to be 
given by or under any other law for the time being in force. 
 
**(5) the area not including the top, bottom, flange at top and bottom of cans, 
and shoulders and neck of bottle and jars shall be determined as follows, namely:-  
(a) 
in the case of a rectangular package, where one entire side can properly be 
considered to be the principal display panel side, the product of the height 
multiplied by the width of that side. 
(b) in case of a cylindrical or nearly cylindrical package, 40 per cent. of the product 
of the height of the package multiplied by the circumference. 
 
(c) in case of any other shaped package , 40 per cent. of the total surface of the 
package, or an area considered to be a principal display panel of the package.” 
 

 
 
20
** inserted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015 and came into force 
w.e.f. 1.7.2016. 
 
*“(4) The area not including the top, bottom, flange at top and bottom of cans, 
and shoulders and neck of bottle and jars shall be determined in the following 
manner,  namely:-   
 
(a) 
in the case of a rectangular package, where one entire side can properly be 
considered to be the principal display panel side, the product of the height 
multiplied by the width of that side; 
(b) in case of a cylindrical or nearly cylindrical package, 40 per cent. of the product 
of the height of the package multiplied by the circumference; 
 
(c) in case of any other shaped package, 40 per cent. of the total surface of the 
package, or an area considered to be a principal display panel of the package. 
 
(5) Except size of the numbers and letters for declaring net weight, retail sale price, date 
of expiry or best before or use by date (wherever and as applicable) and consumer care 
details, the provisions under sub-rules (1) to (4) shall not apply to a package if the 
information to be specified on such package under this rule is also required to be given 
by or under any other law for the time being in force.”. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
8. Declaration where to appear.- 
(1) Every declaration required to be made under these rules shall appear on the 
principal display panel. 
Provided that the area surrounding the quantity declaration shall be free from 
printed information. 
(a) above and below by a space equal to at least the height of the numeral in the 
declaration, and 
(b) to the left and right by a space at least twice the height of numeral in the 
declaration. 
(2) For soft drink, ready to serve fruit beverages or the like, the bottle which is 
returnable by the consumer for being refilled, the retail sale price may be 
indicated either on the crown cap, or on the bottle or on both and if the retail sale 
price is indicated on the crown cap or the bottle, it is sufficient to indicate the 
retail sale price in the form of 'MRP Rs..../ 
......’. 
 
9. Manner in which declaration shall be made.- (1) Every declaration which 
is required to be made on a package under these rules shall be -- 
(a) legible and prominent; 

 
 
21
(b) numerals of the retail sale price and net quantity declaration shall be printed, 
painted or inscribed on the package in a colour that contrasts conspicuously with 
the background of the label; 
Provided that,-- 
(a) where any label information is blown, formed or molded on a glass or plastic 
surface such information need not be required to be presented in a contrasting 
colour; 
(b) where any declaration on a package is printed either in the form of hand-
writing or hand-script, such declaration shall be clear, unambiguous and legible. 
(2) No declaration shall be made so as to require it to be read through any liquid 
commodity contained in the package. 
(3) Where a package is provided with an outside container or wrapper such 
container or wrapper shall also contain all the declarations which are required to 
appear on the package except where such container or wrapper itself is 
transparent and the declarations on the package itself are easily readable through 
such outside wrapper. 
*Provided that no such declarations on the inner package is required if the inner 
package does not contain any declaration on its outer cover.  
*The proviso is omitted vide GSR 385 (E) Dated 14.5.2015. 
 
*“Provided that no such declarations on the inner package is required, if the outer 
package contains all declarations required under these rules.” 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
(4) The particulars of the declarations required to be specified under this rule on 
a package shall either be in Hindi in Devnagri script or in English: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-rule shall prevent the use of any other 
language in addition to Hindi or English language. 
 
10. Declaration of name and address of the manufacturer, etc.-(1) 
Subject to the provisions of rule 6, every package kept, offered or exposed for 
sale or sold shall bear conspicuously on it, the name and complete address of the 
manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is not the packer, the name and 
address of the manufacturer and the packer and in case of imported packages, 
the name and address of the importer: 
Provided that for packages of capacity *5 cubic cm or less, 10 cubic cm or less, 
it shall be a sufficient compliance of this sub-rule, if a mark or inscription which 
would enable the consumer to identify the manufacturer or packer or the 
importer, as the case may be, is made on the package: 
*for the figures, words and letters “5 cubic cm or less”, the figures, words and 
letters “10 cubic cm or less” shall be substituted; 
** Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 

 
 
22
 
Provided further that where any commodity manufactured outside India is packed 
in India, the package shall also contain on the principal display panel the name 
and complete address of the packer or the importer in India. 
Explanation.- In this sub-rule, 'complete address' means, the postal address at 
which the factory is situated, and, in any other case, the name of the street, 
number (if any) assigned to the premises of the manufacturer or packer and either 
the name of the city and State where the business is carried on by the 
manufacturer or packer or the Postal Index Number [PIN] Code so that a 
consumer can identify and locate the manufacturer or packer or importer, as the 
case may be. 
*For the words ‘at which the factory is situated’, the words ‘at which the 
company or firm is registered’ are substituted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 
14th May, 2015 and came into force w.e.f. 1.7.2016. 
 
*“Explanation 1.- In this sub-rule, 'complete address' means, the postal address 
at which the factory is situated or company or firm is registered, and, in any other 
case, the name of the street, number (if any) assigned to the premises of the 
manufacturer or packer or importer and the name of the city and State where the 
business is carried on by the manufacturer or packer or importer and the Postal 
Index Number [PIN] Code so that a consumer can identify and locate the 
manufacturer or packer or importer, as the case may be.”. 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
(2) The name of the manufacturer or packer or importer shall be the actual 
corporate name, or if not incorporated, the name under which the business is 
conducted by such manufacturer or packer or importer in India. 
 
11. General provisions relating to declaration of quantity.—(1) In 
declaring the net quantity of the commodity contained in a package, the weight 
of wrappers and materials other than the commodity shall be excluded.-- 
(2)Where a commodity in a package is not likely to undergo any variation in 
weight or measure, on account of the environmental conditions, the quantity 
declared on the package shall correspond to the net quantity which will be 
received by the consumer, and the declaration of quantity of the commodity as 
declared on the package, and the declaration of quantity on such package shall 
not be qualified by the words 'when packed' or the like. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-rule (4), where a commodity in package is 
likely to undergo variations in weight or measure on account of environmental 
conditions and such variation is negligible, the declaration of quantity in relation 
to such package shall be made after taking into account such variation so that 
the 
consumer 
may 
receive 
not 
less 
than 
the 
net 
quantity 
of  
the commodity as declared on the package, and the declaration of quantity on 
such package shall not also be qualified by the words 'when packed' or the like. 

 
 
23
(4) The declaration of quantity in relation to commodities which are likely to 
undergo significant variations in weight or measures on account of environmental 
or other conditions may be qualified by the words “when packed”, as specified in 
the Third Schedule. 
 
12. Manner in which declaration of quantity shall be.—(1) The declaration 
of quantity shall be expressed in terms of such unit of weight, measure or number 
or a combination of weight, measure or number as would give an accurate and 
adequate information to the consumer with regard to the quantity of the 
commodity contained in the package. 
(2) Except in the cases of commodities specified in the Fourth Schedule, the 
declaration of quantity shall be in terms of the unit of - 
(a) mass, if the commodity is solid, semi-solid, viscous or a mixture of solid and 
liquid; 
(b) length, if the commodity is sold by linear measure; 
(c) area, if the commodity is sold by area measure; 
(d) volume, if the commodity is liquid or is sold by cubic measure; or 
(e) number, if the commodity is sold by number: 
(3) Where the declaration of quantity has been made in terms of mass, the 
manufacturer or importer, as the case may be, the packer may, at his option 
make an additional declaration on the package as to the number of commodities 
contained in the package. 
(4) Where the declaration of quantity by weight or measure or number is not 
sufficient to give to the consumer full information with regard to the dimensions 
or number of commodity contained in the package, such declaration shall be 
accompanied by a declaration of the dimensions or number, or both, where 
necessary, of the commodity contained in the package. 
(5) Where it is necessary to communicate to the consumer any additional 
information about the commodity contained in a package, such information shall 
also appear on the same panel in which the other information, as required by 
these rules, have been indicated. 
*(6) The declaration of quantity shall not contain any word or expression which 
tends to create an exaggerated, misleading or inadequate impression as to the 
quantity of the commodity contained in the package, for example, words or 
expressions like-'minimum', 'not less than', 'average', 'about', approximately' or 
other words of a similar nature. 
*This sub-rule was replaced vide GSR 784 (E) dated 24th October, 2011 
by the following sub-rule: 
*(6). the declaration of the quantity under these rules shall not contain any word 
or expression, of any short whatsoever, which tends to create or is likely to create 
an exaggerated, misleading or inadequate expression as to the quantity of the 
commodity contained in the package.  
(7) For packages having capacity ten cubic cm or less, the declaration of 
quantity shall be made on a tag, card, tape, or any other similar device affixed to 
the container and every such tag, card, tape or other device shall contain mark 

 
 
24
or inscription which will enable the consumer to identity the manufacturer or 
packer, as the case may be. 
*for the words ‘5 cubic cm or less’ the words ‘ten cubic centimeters or less’ are 
substituted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015 
 
13. Statement of units of weight, measure or number.- (1) The units of 
weight or measure or number shall be specified in accordance with the units 
specified in sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), as the case may be. 
(2) When expressing a quantity less than,- 
(a) one kilogram, the unit of weight shall be the gram; 
(b) one metre, the unit of length shall be the centimetre; 
(c) one square metre, the unit of area shall be the square decimetre; 
(d) one cubic metre, the unit of volume shall be one cubic centimetre; 
(e) one cubic decimetre, the unit of volume shall be the cubic centimetre; 
(f) one litre, the unit of volume shall be the millilitre. 
(3) When expressing a quantity of equal to or more than- 
(a) one kilogram, the unit of weight shall be the kilogram and any fraction of a 
kilogram shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiples of kilogram or in 
terms of grams; 
(b) one metre, the unit of length shall be the metre and any fraction of a metre 
shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiples of the metre or in terms 
of centimetre; 
(c) square metre, the unit of the area shall be the square metre and any fraction 
of a square metre shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiple of the 
square metre. 
(d) cubic metre, the unit of volume shall be the cubic metre and any fraction of a 
cubic metre shall be expressed in terms of decimal sub-multiple of the cubic 
metre; 
(e) one litre, the unit of volume shall be the litre and any fraction of a litre shall 
be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiple of the litre: 
Provided that where the quantity to be expressed is equal to one kilogram, one 
metre, one square metre, one cubic decimetre, one cubic metre or one litre, as 
the case may be, such quantity may be expressed at the option of the 
manufacturer or the packer or the importer, as the case may be, in terms of gram, 
centimetre, square decimetre, cubic centimetre, cubic decimetre or millilitre as 
the case may be. 
(4) No number called the dozen, score, gross, great gross or the like shall be 
specified or indicated on any package. 
(5) (i) No system of units other than the International System of Units shall be 
used in furnishing the net quantity of the packages and  
(ii) For items sold by number the symbol should be N or U. 
 
**(ii) for items sold by number, the number or unit or piece or pair or set or such 
other word which represents the quantity in the package shall be mentioned.”. 
 

 
 
25
**Substituted; vide GSR 779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 
1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022). 
 
*Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-rule, it is clarified that for indicating 
the unit for litre, the letter  ‘L’ may be adopted to avoid confusion with the letter 
‘I’ and figure ‘1’.”; 
*Explanation was inserted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015. 
 
 
**(6) where there are number of packages of the same commodity in a 
prepackage, the number of packages and the quantity of each package shall be 
indicated as a supplementary quantity declaration in the package. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-rule, where the net quantity of a 
package is one hundred grams, the number of packages multiplied by the net 
quantity of each package shall be separately indicated in numbers multiplied by 
its individual weight (i.e 10 number x 10 gram).”. 
**Sub-rule (6) was inserted vide G.S.R. 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015. 
 
14. Declarations with regard to dimensions of certain commodities.- 
Where a package contains commodities like bed-sheets, hemmed fabric materials, 
dhoties, sarees, napkins, pillow-covers, towels, table cloths or similar other 
commodities, the number and the dimensions of finished size of such commodities 
shall also be declared on the package or on the label affixed thereto: 
Provided that where the package contains more than one piece of different 
dimensions, the package shall also contain a declaration as to the dimensions and 
the retail sale price of each such piece: 
Provided further that the dimensions of the commodities and the sale price 
thereof shall also be marked on each individual piece. 
 
15. Declaration with regard to dimensions and weight to be made on 
packages in certain cases.- Where the dimensions and weight, or combination 
thereof, a commodity has or have a relationship to the price of that commodity, 
the declaration of quantity on the package containing such commodity, shall also 
include a declaration as to such dimensions, weight or combination. 
 
16. Declarations to be made with regard to the number of usable sheets 
to be stated.-In the case of a package containing sheets like aluminum foil, 
facial tissues, waxed paper, toilet paper or any other type of sheet, the declaration 
of quantity on the package shall also include a statement as to the number of 
usable sheets contained in the package and the dimensions of each such sheet. 
 
17. Declarations with regard to the dimensions of container type 
commodities.--  
The commodities shall be expressed as bags, boxes, cups, pans or the like 
designed and sold in retail trade for being used as containers for other materials 
or objects and shall be labeled with the declaration of quantity as follows.-- 

 
 
26
(i) for bag-type commodities, the number of bags which the package may contain, 
followed by linear dimensions of the bags, whether packaged in a perforated roll 
or otherwise; 
(ii) for square, oblong, rectangular or similarly shaped containers, the number of 
containers which the package may contain, followed by length, width, and if 
required, depth of the container. 
(iii) for circular or generally round-shaped containers, not being cups or the like 
the number of commodities contained therein followed by diameter and, if 
necessary, depth of the container. 
(iv) When the use of a container is related by label references, the standard 
weight or measure, to the capability of the container to hold a specific quantity 
of commodity or a class of commodities such references shall be included in the 
declaration of quantity. 
 
18. Provisions relating to wholesale dealer and retail dealers.-(1) No 
wholesale dealer or retail dealer or importer shall sell, distribute, deliver, display 
or store for sale any commodity in the packaged form unless the package 
complies with in all respects, the provisions of the Act and these rules. 
 
*(1A) The wholesale dealer shall be allowed to sell the pre-packaged commodities 
directly to the industrial and institutional consumers 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
(2) No retail dealer or other person including manufacturer, packer, importer and 
wholesale dealer shall make any sale of any commodity in packed form at a price 
exceeding the retail sale price thereof. 
 
*(2A) Unless otherwise specifically provided under any other law, no 
manufacturer or packer or importer shall declare different maximum retail prices 
on an identical pre-packaged commodity  by adopting restrictive trade practices 
or unfair trade practices as defined under clause (c)  [clause (nnn) and clause (r) 
respectively]** of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 (68 of 1986) $“clause (41) and (47) of section 2 of the Consumer  
Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019)”. 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
** Corrected vide GSR 1373(E) dated 7.11.2017. 
 
$Substituted; vide GSR 779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 
1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022). 
 
(3) Where, after any commodity has been pre-packed for sale, any tax payable 
in relation to such commodity is revised, the retail dealer or any other person 

 
 
27
shall not make any retail sale of such commodity at a price exceeding the revised 
retail sale price, communicated to him by the manufacturer, or where the 
manufacturer is not the packer, the packer, and it shall be, the duty of the 
manufacturer or packer as the case may be, to indicate by not less than two 
advertisements in one or more newspapers and also by circulation of notices to 
the dealers and to the Director in the Central Government and Controllers of Legal 
Metrology in the States and Union Territories, the revised prices of such packages 
but the difference between the price marked on the package and the revised price 
shall not, in any case, be higher than the extent of increase in the tax or in the 
case of imposition of fresh tax higher than the fresh tax so imposed: 
Provided that publication in any newspaper, of such revised price shall not be 
necessary where such revision is due to any increase in, or imposition or, any tax 
payable under any law made by the State Legislation: 
Provided further that the retail dealer or other person, shall not charge such 
revised prices in relation to any packages except those packages which bear 
marking indicating that they were pre-packed in the month in which such tax has 
been revised or fresh tax has been imposed or in the month immediately following 
the month aforesaid; 
Provided also that where the revised prices are lower than the price marked on 
the package, the retail dealer or other person shall not charge any price in excess 
of the revised price, irrespective of the month in which the commodity was pre-
packed. 
(4) Nothing in sub-rule (3) shall apply to a package which is not required, under 
these rules to indicate the month and the year in which it was pre-packed. 
(5) No wholesale dealer or retail dealer or other person shall obliterate, smudge 
or alter the retail sale price, indicated by the manufacturer or the packer or the 
importer, as the case may be, on the package or on the label affixed thereto. 
(6) The manufacturer or packer or the importer shall not alter the price on the 
wrapper once printed and used for packing. 
 
(7)  All retailers who are covered under the Value Added Tax VAT or Turn Over 
Tax (TOT) *Goods and Service Tax and dealing in packaged commodities 
whose net content declaration is by weight or volume or a combination thereof 
shall maintain a electronic weighing machine of at least accuracy class III, with 
smallest division of atleast 1 g, with facility to issue a printed receipt indicating 
among other things, the gross quantity, price and the like at a prominent place in 
their retail premises, free of cost, for the benefit of consumers and the consumers 
may check the weight of their packaged commodities purchased from the shop 
on such machine. 
 
*Substituted; vide GSR 779(E) dated 2nd November, 2021 w.e.f. 
1.4.2022 (now w.e.f 01.10.2022 vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022). 
 
*(8) (1) All the marketing companies, manufacturers, packers, importers or 
distributors of Liquefied Petroleum Gas cylinder shall maintain a check weigher or 

 
 
28
non-automatic weighing instrument, digital or analogue, of Accuracy class-III 
(Max. 50 kg, e=10g) to check the weight of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas cylinder. 
(2) The marketing companies, manufacturers, packers, importers or distributors 
referred to in sub-rule (1), shall provide to the delivery man to measure or weigh 
the correct quantity of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas cylinder. 
* Substituted vide GSR 359(E) dated 6th June, 2013. 
 
19. Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the 
manufacturer or packer.--(1) With a view to ascertaining whether any 
package or lot of packages complies with provisions of these rules in all respects, 
the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer empowered to inspect 
under section 15 of the Act (hereafter referred to as in these rules) the authorized 
person may examine the packages and carry out the tests at the premises of the 
manufacturer or where the manufacturer is not the packer, of the packer and 
when he carries out such examination or tests, he shall draw samples from such 
lot of packages, in such manner and in such number as are specified in the Fifth 
Schedule and the tests aforesaid shall be carried out in accordance with the 
method specified in the Sixth Schedule. 
(2) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall enter in the Form 
set out in the Seventh Schedule, the detailed results of the tests carried out by 
him under sub-rule (1) and shall obtain, on the said Form, the signature of the 
manufacturer or, as the case may be, of the packer, or his authorized agent, or, 
in the absence of both, or on their refusal to affix such signature, the signature 
of a competent witness and copy of the data sheet containing the result shall be 
given to the manufacturer or packer, as the case may be. 
(3) On the completion of the examination and tests carried out under sub-rule 
(1), the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall make a report 
indicating therein his findings with regard to the declarations required to be made 
under these rules and as to the net quantity actually contained in the sample 
packages and the extent of error, if any, noticed by him and furnish a copy of 
such report to the manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be. 
 
(4) If it appears from the report referred to in sub-rule (3) that- 
(a) the *statistical average corrected average of the net quantity contained 
in the packages drawn as samples is lesser than the quantity declared on the 
packages or on the labels affixed thereto; or 
 
*for the words “the statistical average”, the words “the corrected average” shall 
be substituted.  
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
(b) any such package shows an error in deficiency greater than the maximum 
permissible error, the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall, if 
for good and sufficient reason, requested by the manufacturer or packer or his 
authorized agent, so to do, take out as soon as may be practicable, fresh samples 
and carry out fresh tests in accordance with the provisions of these rules and 

 
 
29
where fresh tests are made, the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology 
Officer, as the case may be, shall collect a fee of two thousand five hundred 
rupees from the manufacturer or packer  for carrying out the fresh tests.  
Provided that where fresh tests are carried out, no package contained in the lot, 
which was previously tested under this rule, shall be sold or distributed by the 
manufacturer or packer, as the case may be, unless the provisions of the sub-rule 
(5) or as the case may be, sub-rule (6), are complied with. 
 
 
*(b) the number of packages that show an error in deficiency exceeding the 
maximum permissible error is greater than that shown in column 4 of Table under 
Fifth Schedule; or 
 
(c) any such package shows an error in deficiency exceeding twice the maximum 
permissible error;  
(d) the Director, Controller or the Legal Metrology Officer shall require the 
manufacturer or packer to make a cent per cent check of the packages contained 
in the lot and authorise  sale, distribution or delivery of  only  such packages with 
error in deficiency in the net quantity less than the maximum permissible error 
and the remaining packages shall be allowed to be sold distributed or delivered 
by the manufacturer or packer after it has been repacked or relabeled, as the 
case may be, so as to comply with the provisions of the Act and these Rules. 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
 (5)(a) where, as a result of any test carried out under this rule, it is found that 
any package contained in the lot does not conform to all or any of the provisions 
of the Act or of these rules, the manufacturer or the packer shall make a cent per 
cent check of the packages contained in the lot and pick out from the lot the 
packages which conform to all the provisions of the Act and of these rules. 
(b) When the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer is satisfied that 
the packages picked out by the manufacturer or packer conforms to all the 
provisions of the Act and of these rules, he shall authorize the sale, distribution 
or delivery of such packages. 
(c) Where, as a result of such cent per cent check by the manufacturer or packer, 
any package is found to be not conforming to all or any or of the provisions of 
the Act or of these rules, such package shall not be sold, distributed or delivered 
until it has been re-packed, re-processed or relabeled, as the case may be, in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act and of these rules. 
 
*sub-rule (5) shall be omitted. 
*Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into 
force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 

 
 
30
 
(6) A lot of packages shall be approved for sale if, and only if, as a result of the 
tests carried out under this rule, it is found that- (a) the statistical average of the 
net quantity contained in the sample packages is equal to, or more than, the 
quantity declared on the package or on the label affixed thereto. 
(b) the extent of error in deficiency in none of such sample packages exceeds the 
maximum permissible error.  
(c) each such package bears thereon or on a label affixed thereto- the 
declarations required to be made under these rules.  
 
 
*(6) A lot of packages shall be approved for sale if as a result of the test carried 
out under this rule, it is found that- 
(a) the corrected average net quantity of the sample packages is equal to or more 
than the declared net quantity;   
(b) the number of packages that show an error in deficiency exceeding the 
maximum permissible error is not more than that shown in column 4 of the Table 
under Fifth Schedule; 
(c) no package shows an error in deficiency exceeding twice the maximum 
permissible error;  
(d) every package bears thereon or on a label affixed thereto the declarations 
required to be made under these rules. 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
*(7) The requirement of mandatory declarations on the packages shall be ensured 
either at the factory level or at the depot of the factory.  
*the above sub-rule was substituted vide G.S.R. 784(E) dated 24th 
October, 2011. 
*(7). The requirement of mandatory declarations on the packages shall be 
ensured at the factory level and at the depot of the factory.  
**The expression “ensured either” was replaced as “ensured” vide 
G.S.R. 832(E) dated 23rd November, 2011. 
***(8) For non-compliance of the provisions of this rule, action may be taken 
after seizing five representative samples of the packages as evidence and the rest 
of the packages may be released once compliance is ensured by the manufacturer 
or the packer, as the case may be. 
****the following sub-rule was substituted vide G.S.R. 784(E) dated 
24th October, 2011. 
***(8).For non-compliance of the provisions of this rule ,action may be taken 
after seizing five representative samples of the packages as evidence and the rest 

 
 
31
of the packages  may be released only after compliance is completed by the 
manufacturer or the packer as the case may be.  
 
20. Action to be taken on completion of inspection of packages at the 
premises of the manufacturer or the packer.- 
(1) If it appears from the report referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 19 that,- 
(a) the statistical average of the net quantity contained in the packages drawn as 
samples under that rule is lesser than the quantity declared on the packages or 
on the labels affixed thereto, or any such package shows an error in deficiency 
greater than the maximum permissible error, or 
(b) any such package does not bear thereon or on label affixed thereto the 
declarations to be made under these rules, the Director, Controller or any Legal 
Metrology Officer shall take action as given below, namely:- 
(i) seize the packages drawn by him as samples and shall take adequate steps for 
the safe custody of the seized packages until they are produced in the appropriate 
court as evidence; 
(ii) based on the evidence initiate action for violations of the provisions of the Act 
and these rules: 
Provided that no such action shall be taken if fresh tests are carried out under 
sub-rule (4) of rule 19, but if after such fresh tests any such error or omission as 
is referred to in this sub-rule is detected, the Director, Controller or any Legal 
Metrology Officer shall take appropriate action as specified in this sub-rule in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act against the manufacturer or, as the 
case may be, the packer. 
(3) The disposal of the seized packages shall be made in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
 
*20. Action to be taken on completion of inspection of packages at the 
premises of the manufacturers or the packer.- (1) If it appears from the 
report referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 19 that,-  
(a) the corrected average net quantity contained in the packages  drawn as 
samples is lesser than the quantity declared on the package or the label affixed 
thereto; or    
(b) any such packages showing  an error in deficiency exceeding the maximum 
permissible error is greater than the number specified in column 4 of the Table in 
the Fifth schedule;  or  
 
(c) any package has error in deficiency exceeding twice the maximum permissible 
error; or  
 
(d) any such package does not bear thereon  or on label affixed thereto the 
declarations to be made under these Rules;  
 
the Director, Controller, or the Legal Metrology Officer shall take following action, 
namely:- 
 

 
 
32
(i) seize the packages drawn by him as samples and take adequate steps for the 
safe custody of the seized packages until they are produced in the appropriate 
court as evidence; 
(ii) based on the evidence initiate action for violations as per the provisions of the 
Act and these rules. 
(2) The disposal of the seized packages shall be done in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974). 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
21. Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the 
wholesale dealer or retail dealer (1) Ordinarily, any test in relation to the net 
quantity contained in a package shall not be carried out at the premises of the 
retail dealer or the wholesale dealer, unless- a complaint is received by the 
Director or Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer who has reason to suspect 
that any package has been tampered with or that there has been any pilferage 
or leakage of the commodity contained in the packages and any package, or any 
label affixed thereto, does not bear thereon all or any of the declarations which 
are required to be made under these rules. 
(2) Where any test is carried out in pursuance of the provisions of sub-rule (1), 
the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall verify whether the 
quantity contained in the package corresponds to the quantity declared on such 
packages or any label affixed thereto and where quantity contained in package is 
less than the declared quantity, whether the deficiency is more than the maximum 
permissible error in relation to that commodity. 
(3) Where the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer finds on a test 
carried out under this rule that the error in deficiency in any package kept or 
stored for sale, distribution or delivery at the premises of the retail or wholesale 
dealer is more than the maximum permissible error in relation to that commodity, 
he shall seize such package and take appropriate action against the retail dealer 
or the wholesale dealer, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of 
the Act: 
Provided that where the package bears the legend 'when packed', no punitive 
action shall be taken against the retail dealer or wholesale dealer if the Director, 
Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer is satisfied after necessary test that the 
deficiency in the net quantity contained in package is due to environmental 
conditions. 
(4) Where as a result of any test made under this rule, it is found that the net 
quantity contained in the package conforms to the declared quantity or where 
there is a deficiency, such deficiency is not more than the maximum permissible 
error, the retail dealer shall be at liberty to sell or deliver or distribute such 
commodity at the price determined on the basis of the quantity found on such 
tests. 
(5)Where, as a result of any test made under this rule, it is found that any 
package, or any label affixed thereto, does not bear thereon all or any of the 

 
 
33
declarations required to be made under these rules, it shall be lawful for the 
Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer to make such enquiries as to 
the source from which such package was received by the whole sale dealer or the 
retail dealer as the case may be, as he may think fit. 
 
22. Establishment of maximum permissible error on package.- 
(1) The maximum permissible error in relation to the commodities shall be such 
as is indicated in the First Schedule. 
(2) While establishing the maximum permissible error in relation to the net 
quantity of commodities contained in packages, due account shall be taken of the 
following causes which may lead to variation in quantity, namely:- 
(a) variations caused by unavoidable deviation in weighing, measuring or counting 
the contents of individual packages that may occur in good packaging practice; 
(b) variations caused by the ordinary and customary exposure to conditions, such 
as, climate, transport, storage or the like that normally occur in good distribution 
practice after the commodity is introduced in trade or commerce; and  
(c) variations due to the nature of packaging material or container. 
(3) The Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer shall determine, or 
cause to be determined, in relation to any commodity, the declaration in respect 
of the net quantity of which is permitted to be qualified by the words 'when 
packed'; the reasonable variations which may take place by reason of the 
environmental conditions. 
 
23. Deceptive packages to be repacked or in default to be seized.- 
(1) If, on the determination of the quantity contained in the sample packages, 
the Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer finds that the quantity 
contained in the package agrees with the declaration of the quantity made on the 
package or label thereon but the package is a deceptive package, he shall require 
the manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, to repack and re-label such 
package and in the event of the omission or failure on the part of the 
manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, to repack or re-label such 
deceptive package, in accordance with the standards established by or under 
these rules, seize them, take appropriate punitive action in accordance with the 
Act and take adequate steps for the safe custody of such packages until they are 
produced in a court as evidence. 
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, 'deceptive package' means a package 
which is so designed as to deliberately given to the consumer an exaggerated or 
misleading impression as to the quantity of the commodity contained therein, 
except where bigger dimensions of the package can be justified by the 
manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, on the ground that such 
dimensions are necessary for giving protection to the commodity contained in 
such package or for meeting the requirements of the machine used for filling such 
package. 
(2) If the seized packages contain any commodity which is subject to speedy or 
natural decay, the Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer shall 
dispose of the commodity in accordance with the rules made under the Act. 

 
 
34
 
CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO WHOLESALE PACKAGES 
24. Declarations applicable to be made on every wholesale package 
Every wholesale package shall bear thereon a legible, definite, plain and 
conspicuous declaration as to – 
(a) The name and address of the manufacturer or importer or where the 
manufacturer or importer is not the packer, of the packer; 
(b) the identity of the commodity contained in the package; and 
(c ) the total number of retail package contained in such wholesale package or 
the net quantity in terms of standard units of weights, measures or number of 
the commodity contained in wholesale package; 
Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply in relation to a wholesale package if 
a declaration similar to the declarations specified in this rule, is required to be 
made on such wholesale packages by or under any other law for the time being 
in force. 
CHAPTER IV 
EXPORT OF PACKAGED COMMODITIES 
25. Restrictions on sale of export packages in India.-An export package 
shall not be sold in India unless the manufacturer or packer has re-packed or 
relabeled the commodity in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 
II, and where any export package is sold in India without such re-packing or re-
labeling, such package shall be liable to be seized in accordance with the 
provisions of the Act. 
 
CHAPTER V 
EXEMPTIONS 
26. Exemption in respect of certain packages.-Nothing contained in these 
rules shall apply to any package containing a commodity if— 
(a) the net weight or measure of the commodity is ten gram or ten millilitre or 
less, if sold by weight or measure; 
*Provided that the declaration in respect of maximum retail price and net quantity 
shall be declared on the packages containing 10g to 20g or 10ml to 20 ml; 
* the proviso was omitted vide GSR 784 (E) dated 24th October, 2011.  
**Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not be applicable for tobacco 
and tobacco products.”. 
** the proviso was inserted vide GSR 385 (E) dated 14.5.2015 and came 
into force w.e.f. 1.7.2016.  
 
(b) any package containing fast food items packed by restaurant or hotel and the 
like; 
(c) it contains scheduled formulations and non-scheduled formulations covered 
under the Drugs (Price Control) Order,1995 made under section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955); 
 

 
 
35
$(c) it contains scheduled formulations and non-scheduled formulations covered 
under the Drugs (Price Control) Order, 2013 made under section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955): 
  
Provided that no exemption shall be applicable to medical devices declared as 
drugs. 
 
$ Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
(d) agricultural form produces in packages of above 50 kg. 
 
#clause (d) shall be omitted. 
 
# amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came into force 
w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
***the following clause was substituted vide G.S.R. 870(E) dated 4th 
December, 2014. 
*** (e) any thread which is sold in coil to handloom weavers. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
REGISTRATION OF MANUFACTURERS, PACKERS AND IMPORTERS 
27. Registration of manufacturers, packers and importers.- 
(1) Every individual, firm, Hindu undivided family, society, company or corporation 
who or which pre-packs or imports any commodity for sale, distribution or delivery 
shall make an application, accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred, to the 
Director or the Controller for the registration of his or its name and complete 
address; and every such application shall be made,- 
(i) in the case of an applicant pre-packing or importing any commodity on the 
date of commencement of these rules, within a period of ninety days from such 
commencement; or 
(ii) in the case of any applicant who or which commences pre-packing or importing 
of any commodity after the commencement of these rules, within ninety days 
from the date on which he or it commences such pre-packing. 
(2) Every application referred in sub-rule (1) shall contain the following 
particulars, namely:- 
(a) the name of the applicant; 
(b) the complete address of the premises at which the pre-packing or import of 
one or more commodities is made by the applicant; and 
(c) the name of the commodity or commodities pre-packed or imported by the 
applicant. 
Explanation: In this sub-rule, 'complete address' has the meaning assigned to it 
in the explanation to sub-rule (1) of rule 10.' 

 
 
36
(3) For making any alteration in the registration certificate issued under sub rule 
(1), a fee of rupees one hundred shall be paid by the concerned manufacturer or 
packer or importer to the Director or Controller. 
(4) On receipt of the application made under sub-rule (1), the Director or 
Controller, who shall be the Registering Authority, shall- 
(a) if the application is not complete in all respects, return the same to the 
applicant within a period of seven working days from the date of receipt of the 
application; 
(b) if the application is complete in all respects, register the applicant and grant 
a registration certificate to the applicant to that effect. 
 
 28.  Registration of shorter address permissible.-(1) It shall be lawful for 
any manufacturer or packer to make an application to the Director or the 
Controller for the registration of a shorter address, in addition to the complete 
address referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 27. 
(2) The Director or the Controller may, if he is satisfied after inquiry that 
the shorter address is sufficient to enable the consumer or any other person to 
identify the manufacturer or the packer, register such shorter address. 
(3) Where a shorter address is registered by the Director or the Controller, it shall 
be lawful for the manufacturer or packer to state such shorter address on the 
label of each commodity pre-packed by him or it. 
 
29. Registration of manufacturers and packers, etc.- 
(1) The Director or the Controller shall enter in a register, to be maintained by 
him for the purpose, the name and complete address of each manufacturer or 
packer by whom application for such registration has been made to him under 
rule 27. 
(2)The register referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be open to the inspection of the 
public without payment of any fee. 
CHAPTER VII-GENERAL 
30. Compilation of lists of manufacturers or packers and their 
circulation. The Director/ Controller shall compile a State-wise list of the 
manufacturers and packers registered by him under rule 29 and shall circulate 
such list to the Controller of the concerned State to enable the Controller to take, 
or cause to be taken, samples at the premises of the manufacturer or, where the 
manufacturer is not the packer, of the packer. 
 
31. (1) Any advertisement mentioning the retail sale price of the pre-packaged 
commodity shall contain a declaration as to the net quantity or number of the 
commodity contained in the package.  
(2)The font size of the net quantity in the advertisement shall be same as that of 
retail sale price.    
 
32. Penalty for contravention of Rules 

 
 
37
(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of rules 27 and 28, he shall be punished with fine 
of four thousand rupees. 
** for the figures and word ’27 to 31’, the figures and word ’27 and 28’ are 
substituted vide GSR 385 (E) dated 14.5.2015; 
 
(2) Whoever contravenes any other provision of these rules, for the contravention of which 
no punishment has been provided either in the Act or in the rules, he shall be punished 
with fine of two thousand rupees. 
*** The words either in the Act or in the rules are omitted  vide GSR 385 
(E) dated 14.5.2015; 
 
*(3)  Sum of compounding of offences.- The sum of compounding of offences committed 
under the said Act shall be as specified in the following Table, namely:- 
TABLE 
Sr. No. 
Offence 
Compounding amount 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
 
If the application 
for compounding 
is by retailers or 
wholesale dealers 
If 
the 
application for 
compounding 
is 
by 
manufacturers 
or importers 
1. 
Contravention of section 29 
Rupees 
two 
thousand 
Rupees 
ten 
thousand 
2. 
Contravention of sub-section 
(1) of section 36 
Rupees 
five 
thousand 
Rupees twenty 
five thousand 
3. 
Contravention of sub-section 
(2) of section 36 
Rupees 
ten 
thousand  
Rupees 
fifty 
thousand 
4. 
Selling of products for more 
than the maximum retail 
price 
Rupees 
two 
thousand 
Rupees 
five 
thousand  
 
* Substituted vide GSR 359 (E) dated 6th June, 2013. 
 
 
**32. Fine for contravention of rules.- 
 
Whoever contravenes any provisions of these rules, for which no punishment is 
provided, shall be punished with fine of five thousand rupees. 
 
32A. Sum of compounding of offences.- The sum of compounding of offences 
committed under the Act shall be as specified in the following Table, namely:- 
TABLE 
 

 
 
38
Sr. 
No
. 
Offence 
Compounding amount 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
 
If the application for 
compounding is by 
retailers or wholesale 
dealers 
If 
the 
application 
for 
compounding 
is 
by 
manufacturers or importers 
1. 
Contravention of 
section 29 
Rupees two thousand 
Rupees ten thousand 
2. 
Contravention of 
sub-section (1) of 
section 36 
Rupees five thousand 
Rupees 
twenty 
five 
thousand 
3. 
Contravention of 
sub-section (2) of 
section 36 
Rupees ten thousand  
Rupees fifty thousand 
 
 
** Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
33. Power to relax: *(1)The Central Government may, after ascertaining the 
genuineness of the compounding of a case or a Court decision stated in 
the application, permit a manufacturer or packer to pack for sale the packages 
for a reasonable period by relaxing one or more provision of these Rules with 
such corrective measures as may be specified.  
*Numbered as sub-rule (1) of rule 33 vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 
2012. 
*** The words of the compounding of a case or a Court decision stated 
in the application are omitted  vide GSR 385 (E) dated 14.5.2015; 
 
 
$**(2).The central Government  may, after ascertaining  the genuineness  of  a 
case stated in the application permit a manufacturer or packer  or importer to 
pack or  sell of  the packages other than specified in the Second Schedule for a 
maximum period of one year  by relaxing the rules. 
 
** substituted vide G.S.R. 427(E) dated 5th June 2012. 
 
$ Omitted vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022 w.e.f. 1.10.2022. 
 
34. Repeal and savings.- (1) The Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules, 1977 (herein under referred to as the said rules) are hereby 
repealed. 
Provided that such repeal shall not affect: 
(a) the previous operations of the said rules or anything done or omitted to be done 
or suffered therein; or 

 
 
39
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said 
rules; or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed 
against the said rules; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid. 
And any such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or 
enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said 
rules had not been rescinded. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken or purported to have 
been done or taken including approval of letter, exemption granted, fees collected, any 
adjudication, enquiry or investigation commenced, license and registration of 
manufacturers, dealers, importers of pre-packaged commodities, or show cause notice, 
decision, determination, approval, authorisation issued, given or done under the said 
rules shall if in force at the commencement of the said rules continue to be in force and 
have effect as if issued, given or done under the corresponding provisions of these rules.  
 (3) The provisions of these rules shall apply to any application made to the Central 
Government or as the case may be the State Government under the said rules for licence, 
registration of manufacturers, importers, dealers of pre-packaged commodities pending 
at the commencement of these rules and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to 
any registration granted in pursuance thereof.  
(4) Any legal proceeding pending in any court under the said rules at the commencement 
of these rules may be continued in that court as if these rules had not been framed.  
(5) Any appeal preferred to the Central Government or as the case may be the State 
Government under the said rules and pending shall be deemed to have been made under 
the corresponding provisions of these rules. 
 
 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See Rule 2(e)] 
1. Maximum permissible errors on net quantity declared by weight or 
volume.- 
(1) The maximum permissible error, in excess or in  deficiency,  in the net quantity 
by weight or volume  of  any commodity shall be as specified in Table I below:- 
TABLE-I 
Maximum permissible errors on net quantities declared by weight or by volume 
Sl. 
No. 
Declared quantity 
g or ml 
Maximum permissible error in excess 
or in deficiency 
 
 
As percentage of 
declared quantity 
g or ml 
(i) 
up to 50 
9 
- 
(ii) 
50 to 100 
- 
4.5 
(iii) 
100 to 200 
4.5 
- 
(iv) 
200 to 300 
- 
9 
(v) 
300 to 500 
3 
- 
(vi) 
500 to 1000 
- 
15 
(vii) 
1000 to 10000 
1.5 
- 

 
 
40
(viii) 
10000 to 15000 
- 
150 
(ix) 
More than 15000 
1.0 
- 
 
(2) The maximum permissible error specified as percentage shall be rounded off 
to the nearest one-tenth of a g or ml, for a declared quantities less than or equal 
to 1000 g or ml and to the next whole g or ml for declared quantities above 1000 
g or ml. 
 
2. The maximum permissible errors on net quantity declared by length, 
area or number. - (1) The maximum permissible error, in excess or in deficiency, 
in the net quantity declared in terms of length, area or number of any commodity 
not specified in the First Schedule shall be as specified in Table II below:- 
 
TABLE -II 
The maximum permissible errors on net quantities declared by length, area or 
number  
Sl. 
No. 
Quantity 
Declared 
Maximum permissible error in excess or in 
deficiency 
(i) 
in units of length 
2% of declared quantity up to 10 metre and 
thereafter 1% of declared quantity. 
(ii) 
in units of area 
4% of declared quantity up to 10 sq. metre 
and thereafter 1% of declared quantity. 
(iii) 
by number 
2% of declared quantity. 
 
 
$THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See rule 5) 
Commodities to be packed in specified quantities 
The following commodities shall be packed in such quantities by weight, measure or 
number as are specified in the corresponding entries against them. 
Sl. 
No. 
Commodities 
Quantities in which to be packed 
  
1. 
2. 
 3. 
1. 
Baby food 
25g, 50g, 100g, 200g, 300g, 350g, 400g, 450g, 
500g, 600,g, 700 g, 800 g, 900g, 1 kg, 2kg, 5 
kg and 10 kg. 
2. 
Weaning food. 
Below 50g no restriction, 50 g, 100g, 200g, 
300g, 400g, 500g, 600g, 700g, 800g, 900g, 1 
kg, 2 kg, 5 kg and 10 kg. 
* 75g, 125g, 150g, 250g 
3. 
Biscuits 
25g, 50g, 60g, 75g, 100g, 120g, 150g, 200g, 
250g, 300g, thereafter in multiples of 100g up 

 
 
41
to 1 kg and thereafter in multiples of 500g up 
to 5 kg. 
*350g, 400g 
4. 
Bread including brown 
bread but excluding 
bun. 
50g and there after in of multiples 50g upto 
500g and above 500g in the multiples of 100g. 
5. 
Un-canned packages 
of 
butter 
and 
margarine 
Below 25g no restriction,  25 g, 50 g, 100 g, 200 
g, 500 g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg, and thereafter in 
multiples of 5 kg. 
6. 
Cereals and Pulses 
Below 100g no restriction, 100g, 200g, 500g, 1 
kg, 2 kg, 5 kg and thereafter multiples of 5 kg  
7. 
Coffee 
Below 25g no restriction, 25g, 50g, 75g, 100g, 
150g, 200g, 250g, 500g, 1kg, 1.5kg, 2kg and 
thereafter in multiples of 1kg. 
*750g 
8. 
Tea 
*Below 25 g no restriction25g, 50g, 75g, 100g, 
125g, 150g, 200g, 250g, 500g, 750g, 1kg, 
1.5kg, 2kg and thereafter in multiples of 1kg 
 
9. 
Materials which may 
be 
constituted 
or 
reconstituted 
as 
beverages. 
Below 50g no restriction, 50 g, 75g, 100 g, 200 
g, 250g, 400g, 450g, 500 g, 750g, 1 kg and 
thereafter in multiples of 1 kg. 
(56g and 61g for medical purpose only) 
*125g 
10 
Edible Oils Vanaspati, 
ghee, butter oil 
50 g, 100 g, 200 g, 250g, 500 g, *550 g, 600 
g, 650 g 1 kg, 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg and thereafter 
in multiples of 5 kg.  If net quantity is declared 
by volume then 50ml, 100ml, 200ml, 250ml, 
500ml, *550 ml, 600 ml, 650 ml, 1 litre, 2 
litre, 3 litre, 5 litre and thereafter in multiple of 
5 litre and the net quantity must be declared by 
mass also in the same size of letters/ numerals 
*below 50g no restriction, 175g, 300g, 750g 
*below 50ml no restriction, 175ml, 300ml, 
750ml 
11. 
Milk Powder. 
Below 50g no restriction, 50 g, 100g, 150g, 
200g, 250g, 500 g, 1 kg and thereafter in 
multiples of 500 g. 
12. 
Non-soapy detergents 
(powder) 
Below 50 g no restriction, 50g, 75g, 100g, 150g, 
200g, 250g, 400g**, 500g, 700g, 750g, 

 
 
42
800g**, 1kg, 1.5 kg, 2 kg and thereafter, in 
multiples 
of 1 kg.  
13. 
Rice(powdered), flour, 
atta, rawa  
and suji. 
100g, 200g, 500g, 1kg, 1.25kg, 1.5kg, 1.75kg, 
2kg, 5 kg and 
thereafter in multiples of 5 kg. 
*2.5kg, 3kg 
14. 
Salt 
Below 50g in multiples of 10g, 50g, 100g, 200g, 
500g, 750g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg and thereafter in 
multiples of 5 kg. 
15. 
Soaps  
 
  
  
(a) Laundry Soap 
25g, 50g, 75g, 100g, 125g, 150g and thereafter 
in multiples of 50g. 
  
(b) Non-soapy 
detergent cakes/ bars. 
Below 50g no restriction, 50g, 75g, 100g, 125g, 
150g, 200g, 250g, 300g and thereafter in 
multiples of 100g  
  
(c) 
Toilet 
Soap 
including all kinds of 
bath soap (cakes).  
15g, 25g, 50g, 60g, 75g, 100g, 125g, 150g and 
thereafter in multiples of 50g. 
16. 
  
  
Aerated soft drinks, 
non-alcoholic 
beverages.  
65 ml (fruit based drinks only), 100 ml, 
125ml(fruit based drinks only), 150 ml, 160ml, 
175ml, 180ml, 200 ml, 240ml, 250 ml, 300 ml, 
330ml (in cans only), 350ml, 400ml, 475ml, 500 
ml, 600ml, 750 ml, 1 litre, 1.2 litre, 1.25 litre, 
1.5 litre, 1.75 litre, 2 litre, 2.25 litre, 2.5 litre, 3 
litre, 4 litre and 5 litre  
*the words (in can only) omitted. 
17. 
 
Mineral 
water 
and 
drinking water 
100 ml, 150 ml, 200 ml, 250 ml, 300 ml, 500 ml, 
750 ml, 1 litre, 1.5 litre, 2 litre, 3 litre, 4 litre, 5 
litre and in multiples of 5 litre.  
18. 
Cement in bags. 
1 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg, 10 kg, 20 kg, 25 kg, 40 kg (for 
White cement only) and 50 kg. 
 
19. 
Paint varnish etc.  
  
  
(a) Paint (other than 
paste paint or solid 
50 ml, 100 ml, 200 ml, 500 ml, 1 litre, 2 litre, 3 
litre, 4 litre, 5 litre and thereafter in multiples of 
5 litre.  

 
 
43
paint) varnish, varnish 
stains, enamels. 
  
(b) Paste paint and 
solid paint 
500g, 1 kg, 1.5 kg, 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg, 7kg and 
thereafter multiple of 5 kg. 
  
(c) Base paint: 
 
100ml, 250ml, 400ml, 450 ml, 500 ml, 900 ml, 
925 ml, 950 ml, 975 ml, 1 litre, 1.5 litre, 2.0 
litre, 2.5 litre, 3.5 litre, 3.6 litre, 3.7 litre, 3.8 
litre, 3.9 litre and 4 litre and no restriction above 
4 litre. 
 
*substituted vide GSR 359(E) dated 6th June, 2013. 
*inserted vide GSR 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
$ Omitted vide GSR 226(E) dated 28.3.2022 w.e.f. 1.10.2022. 
 
 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 11(4)) 
Declaration of quantity in relation to commodities (sold by weight or volume) which may be qualified by the words “When 
packed”   
     Sl. No.                                        Name of commodity 
1. 
   All kinds of Soaps 
2. 
   Lotions 
3. 
Cream (other than cream of milk) 
4. 
Camphor* 
*inserted vide GSR 385(E) dated 14th May, 2015. 
 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 12(2)) 
Exceptions referred to in Rule 12(2) 
1. The following commodities in packaged form may be sold by weight, measure or number as shown against the 
commodity:- 
TABLE 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----- 
Sl.                  Commodity                                                                   Whether declaration to be expressed  in terms   
No.                                                                                        of  weight, measures or number or two or more of them 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----- 
1.                        2.                                                                                                 3. 

 
 
44
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---- 
1.                  Aerosol Products                                                                                Weight 
2.                  Acids in liquid form                                                                            Weight or volume 
3.                 Compressed or liquefied                                                                      Weight and equivalent volume 
                    gas(but not liquefied petroleum gas)                                                 at stated temperature and pressure 
4.                 Curd                                                                                                  Weight 
5.                 Electric Cables                                                                                    Length or weight 
6.                 Electric wire                                                                                        Length or weight 
7.                 Fencing wire                                                                                       Number or weight 
8.                 Fruits, all kinds                                                                                    Number or weight 
9.                 Furnace oil                                                                                          Weight or volume 
10.               Non edible vegetable oil                                                                        Weight or volume 
11.               Edible oil, Vanaspati                                                                             Weight or volume 
                   ghee and butter oil 
12.              Heavy residual fuel oil                                                                            Weight 
13.              Industrial diesel fuel                                                                               Volume 
14.             Honey, malt-extract,                                                                                Weight 
                 golden syrup treacle  
*15.           Ice cream and other                                                                               * Volume 
                similar frozen products   
16.           Liquid chemicals                                                                                       Weight or volume 
17.           Liquefied petroleum gas                                                                            Weight 
18.           Nails, wood screws                                                                                    Number or weight 
19.           Paints other than paste                                                                              Volume  
               paint or solid paint) Varnish 
               varnish stains, enamels 
20.         Paste paint, solid paint                                                                                 Weight 
21.         Rasgulla, Gulabjamun                                                                                  Weight 
             and other sweet preparations  
22.         Ready-made garments                                                                                  Number 
23.         Sauces, all kinds                                                                                           Weight 
24.          Tyres and tubes                                                                                           Number 
25.         Yarn                                                                                                           Weight or length of yarn. 
26.        Cosmetics including                                                                                        Weight or measure 
           creams, shampoo, lotions and perfumes  
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- 
* Sr. No. 15. For Ice cream and other similar frozen products the words 
“volume” were replaced by the words “Weight” vide GSR 784 (E) dated 
24th October, 2011 and were further amended by the words “weight or 
volume” vide G.S.R.426(E) dated 5th June 2012. 
 
 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 19) 

 
 
45
Manner of Selection of Sample Packages 
1. For determination of the net quantity for any commodity contained in a package, the sample size shall be such as is 
specified in the corresponding entry column 2 of the Table below against the lot size specified in Column 1 of the said 
Table. 
Lot Size 
Sample Size 
(1) 
(2) 
Less than 4000 
32 
More than 4000 
80 
 
Serial 
numb
er 
Inspec
tion lot 
size  
  (1) 
Sam
ple 
size 
(n) 
(2) 
Correctio
n  
factor  
( C )  
(3) 
Number of packages showing 
an 
error 
more 
than 
the 
maximum permissible error but 
less than twice the maximum 
permissible error  
                     (4)  
1. 
100 to 
500 
50 
0.379 
                      3  
2. 
501 to 
3200 
80 
0.295 
                      5  
3. 
More 
than 
3200 
125 
0.234 
                      7”. 
 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
2. The sample shall be selected at random in accordance with the manner 
specified in paragraphs 3 and 4. 
3. Where, for the determination of the net quantity of any commodity contained 
in a package it is necessary to take samples of packages stored by the 
manufacture or packer in a ware house, go-down or at any other place, the 
sample shall be selected at random, from ever lot of packages and shall be picked 
out from the top, bottom, center, right, left, front and rear of the stocks so that 
the samples may adequately represent the packages in the lot. 
4. Where, for the determination of the net quantity of any commodity contained 
in a package it is necessary to take samples form the place where the package is 
being filled such samples shall be selected from among the package which have 
already been filled, or in the alternatively, the requisite number of empty 
containers may be taken over and each of them shall be adequately marked for 
proper identification and the tare weight of each container shall be accurately 
noted and thereafter the marked containers shall be introduced at random in the 

 
 
46
packing process so that, after the packages are filled in may be possible to 
determine the net quantity 
Explanation: In this schedule 'Sample size' means the umber of packages to be 
selected as sample. 
 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 19) 
Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities in Packages 
Part-I - Equipment 
1. Equipments required- (1) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology 
Officer authorized by or under the Act, to determine the net quantity; of 
commodity  contained  in any package, shall be  provided  by  the 
concerned 
 Government 
with 
adequate 
equipments 
and 
facilities 
 to 
carry  out  his  work to the required degree of  accuracy  in  an Expedient and 
efficient manner. 
(2) The equipments, referred to in sub-paragraph (1), shall ordinarily consist of 
working standard weights and balances, or any other weight or measure declared 
by the Director to be suitable for determining the net quantity contained in the 
concerned package. 
(3) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall, before 
determining the net quantity contained in any package, ensure that the working 
standards and other equipments are functioning properly. 
 
2. Working standards to be ordinarily used.-(1)  Ordinarily, working 
standards and other weights and measures, duly  verified  shall be used for 
determining the net quantities  contained in packages and the errors, if any, in 
relation to the net  quantity declared on the package. 
Provided that, where it is necessary to use the weights and measures, owned or 
controlled by the manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer as the case may be 
such 
weights 
and 
measures, 
shall be 
used 
unless 
the 
maximum permissible error of such weights and measures is twenty per cent or 
less of the maximum error permitted n relation to the net quantity of 
the commodity contained in the packages.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer to 
render such assistance the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer as 
the Director or other authorized person may require in order carrying out his 
duties expeditiously and efficiently. 
(3) Where any weight, measure or other equipment, owned or controlled by the 
manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer is used by the Director, Controller or 
any Legal Metrology Officer for the determination or the net quantity contained 
in any package, such weight, measure or other equipment shall not be released 
by the Director or other authorized person until his work is completed. 
 
Part-II - Instructions with regard to the determination of quantity and 
error at manufacturer's or packer's premises. 

 
 
47
3. (1) If empty tare packages are available, one such package shall be taken 
and tare package weight determined.  If the tare package weight is equal to or 
less than three-tenths of the maximum permissible error for the concerned 
commodity of that quantity, it shall be assumed that the tare package weight so 
determined is valid for all the other packages in the sample, and the sample 
packages shall then be weighed for gross weight, and thereafter the net weight 
of commodity contained in each package shall be obtained by subtracting the tare 
package weight from the gross package weight. If the tare package 
weight so determined is more than three tenths of the maximum permissible 
error in relation to the commodity for that quantity, weight of four emptier tare 
packages shall be determined. If the difference between the maximum tare 
package weight and the minimum tare package weight of the five samples is 
equal to or less than four tenths of the maximum permissible error allowed for 
that commodity for that quantity, the tare weight of the package shall be taken 
as equal to the average of the five tare package weights. The gross weight of the 
package in the sample shall then be determined and the average tare package 
weight shall be subtracted from the gross package weight to obtain the net 
contents of the commodity in each package, in the sample. However, when 
the difference in the five individual tare weights of the packages exceeds the limit 
of four tenths of the maximum permissible error specified above, the procedure 
specified in sub-paragraph (4) or sub-paragraph (5), as the case may be, shall be 
adopted for determining the net quantity of individual packages. 
(2) In the absence of empty tare packages, one package from the sample shall 
be opened and the net weight of the commodity and the tare weight of the 
package determined. If the tare weight of the package is equal to or less than 
three-tenth of the maximum permissible error for that concerned commodity of 
that quantity, it shall be assumed that the tare weight of one package so 
determined is valid for all the other packages in the sample, and the remaining 
packages shall then be weighed for gross weight, and thereafter the net weight 
of commodity contained in each package shall be obtained by subtracting the tare 
weight from the gross weight. 
(3) If the tare weight of the package specified in  sub-paragraph  (2) is more 
than  three-tenths  of  the maximum  permissible  error in relation to 
that  commodity,  four more  packages in the samples shall be opened and the 
net  weight of  the commodity in each package as well as the tare  weight  of 
each package shall be determined. If the difference between the maximum tare 
weight and the minimum tare weight of five samples is equal to or less than four-
tenths of the maximum permissible error for that commodity of that quantity, the 
tare weight of the package shall be taken as equal to the arithmetic mean of the 
five tare weights.  The gross weight of the packages in the sample shall then be 
determined to the requisite accuracy and the average tare weight of the contained 
shall be subtracted from the gross weight to obtain the net contents of the 
commodity in each package in the sample. 
 (4) Where it is found on examining the first package, as described in sub-
paragraph (2) that the tare weight of the container exceeds the limits specified in 
sub-paragraph (2) and sub-paragraph  (3) and the determination of net contents, 

 
 
48
cannot be carried out without opening the remaining packages, or it is not, 
possible to use the procedure to use the procedure described  in sub-paragraph 
(5) the size of the sample to be examined shall  be restricted  to that indicated in 
column (2) , in accordance  with the lot indicated in column (1) of Table of the 
Fifth Schedule and  the  determination of net quantity shall be carried  out  by 
opening all the packages in the sample. 
(5) Where it is likely that the process of determination  of the actual net quantity 
may be destructive and it is possible  to feed empty package into the packing 
process without affecting the results, the following procedure shall be used: 
(a) the number of empty packages, depending upon the size of the lot, in 
accordance with columns (1) and (2) of Table of the Fifth Schedule shall be 
selected; 
(b) the empty package shall be marked suitably to identify  them from the other 
packages; 
(c) the weight of each empty package, with its other parts  which are to be fitted 
on it after it is filled shall be determined and the weight suitably recorded on the 
empty package and also on the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule; 
(d) the  empty package shall then be filled by introducing  them in a random 
manner in the packing process, and such  introduction shall  be adequately spread 
over the duration in accordance  with which ;the size of the lot is determined; 
(e) the  marked packages shall be taken out after completion  of the  filling and 
sealing operations and each such filled  package shall be weighed again to the 
requisite accuracy; 
(f) the net quantity shall be obtained by deducting the tare weight determined in 
accordance with clause (c) from the gross weight. 
(6) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall enter  results 
of  this examination of gross weight, net weight and tare  weight in  the Form 
specified in the Seventh Schedule along  with  such other  observation  as he may 
wish to make on the  basis  of  his examination. 
 
4.  Determination of liquid contents by volume.-(1) If the  specific gravity 
of the liquid commodity filled in packages  remains sufficiently constant for a lot 
and it is possible to determine accurately  its specific gravity the method 
of  determination  of net contents by weight, described in paragraph 3 may be 
used. 
(2) If the method described in sub-paragraph (1) is not feasible the 
containers shall be opened and the contents of each package poured out carefully 
into the appropriate volume measure. 
(3) The reading of the actual net volume of the commodity in every package shall 
be noted carefully and recorded in the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule. 
 
5.  Verification of length of commodities.-(1) The sample shall be selected 
in the manner specified in the Fifth Schedule. 
(2) If it is not possible to measure the dimensions with out opening the package, 
the package shall be opened. 

 
 
49
(3) The length of the commodity shall be measured by means of a calibrated steel 
tape of suitable length. 
(4) If the actual length of the commodity is so great that it is not  possible to 
measure it with the tape measure and a  suitable length  measuring instrument 
is available on the  premises,  that instrument  shall be use, after duly calibrating 
it  by  suitable means,  with  the  steel tape serving  ala  working  standard  of 
length. 
(5)  The reading of the actual length of the commodity in every package shall be 
noted carefully and recorded in the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule. 
 
6.  Verification of commodities packed by number.- The Director, Controller 
or any Legal Metrology Officer shall take packages from the sample drawn by him 
in the manner specified in the Fifth Schedule and determine the extent of error, 
by actual counting in each such package and may, for that purpose open all 
packages.  
 
7.  Checking of other declarations.- (1) The declarations made on 
the  package or on the label affixed thereto, shall  be  examined with a view to 
ascertaining whether such declarations conform  to these rules and may be 
ensured either at the factory level or at the depot of the factory . 
 (2)The additional declarations made on the package or on the label affixed 
thereto in respect of item (f) and (g) of sub-rule (1) of rule 6 shall also be 
examined to ascertain whether they are adequate. 
* 8. Determination of mean or average net quantity or net volume.- 
After determining the individual values of net quantity or net volume or length or 
number of the commodity contained in the package, as per the procedure outlined 
in item numbers 3 to 6 of this Part, the mean or average value shall be calculated 
by summing up the individual values (xi) and dividing it by the number of sample 
packages (n) taken for testing, by the formula-   
 
Average Net value ( ) = ∑ xi / n . 
 
9. Determination of Standard deviation of values.-  
The standard deviation (σ) of individual values [xi] is determined by the formula 
-   
      
σ= 
 ; where ,  
           
xi   = individual values of net quantity or net volume or length or number , 
  = average or mean value of net quantity or net volume or length or number. 
 
10. Corrected average net quantity or net volume.-  
The corrected average net quantity Xc is determined from the value of average 
net quantity [  ] by using the formula -  
 

 
 
50
Xc     =      + (σ x C),       where C is the correction factor. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
Form A 
Weight Checking – Data Sheet 
A 
Particulars of Package                                                                          Name of Manufacturer/ Packer 
 
Address 
Price 
Month 
Year 
 
B  
Commodity Classification 
Lot Size:                                                  Sample 
Size: 
Schedule First/ Second  
Class A/ B 
Maximum permissible error in percentage  
 
*Lot size:                 
Sample size:                      
Maximum permissible error (g) 
 
C 
Sample   Gross        Tare         Net                     
Remarks 
No.         Weight      Weight      Weight/ error 
 
Weight  
Checking Data 
1 
200 
 
D  
Results 
 
Declared  Wt.                               
Avg. Wt. 
 
E 
GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE 
COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE 
THEREUNDER 
 
F                                                        
                                                               Signature and name of the                     Signature and name of 
manufacturer/  
                                                                authorized person                                  packer authorized by 
manufacturer or         
                                                                                                                            any competent witness 
                                
                                                                         Place:  
Designation: 

 
 
51
Name: 
Time: 
 
Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall bear the signatures specified in 
Part F. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
 
Form B 
Volume/ Length Checking – Data Sheet 
A 
Particulars of Package                                                                          Name of Manufacturer/ Packer 
 
Address 
Price 
Month 
Year 
 
B  
Commodity Classification 
Lot Size:                                                  Sample Size: 
Schedule First/ Second  
Class A/ B 
Maximum permissible error in percentage  
*Lot size:                 
Sample size:                       
Maximum permissible error (g) 
 
C 
Sample   Gross        Tare         Net                     
Remarks 
No.         Weight      Weight      Weight/ error 
 
Volume/ Length  
Checking Data 
1 
200 
 
D  
Results 
 
Declared Volume/ Length                   Avg. Volume/ 
Length                                                          
 
E 
GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE 
COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE 
THEREUNDER 
 
F                                                        
                                                               Signature and name of the                  Signature and name of 
manufacturer/  
                                                                authorized person                              packer authorized by 
manufacturer or                                                                                                                                  any 
competent witness 

 
 
52
                                                                Place:  
Designation: 
Name: 
Time: 
 
Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall 
bear the signatures specified in Part F. 
* Substituted/ amended vide GSR 629(E) dated 23rd June, 2017, came 
into force w.e.f. 1.1.2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
53
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE LEGAL METROLOGY (PACKAGED 
COMMODITIES) RULES, 2011 
 

 
 
54
 

 
 
55
 
