MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948 
Background  
The initiative started with the resolution placed by one Shri. K. G. R. 
Choudhary in 1920 for setting up Boards for determination of minimum wages in 
each industry. 
The International Labour Conference adopted in 1928 Convention No.26 
and Recommendation No. 30 relating to wage fixing machinery in trades or parts 
of trades.  
On the recommendation of the Standing Labour Committee and Indian 
Labour Conference, a Labour Investigation Committee was appointed in 1943 to 
investigate into the question of wages and other matters like housing, social 
conditions and employment.  
A draft bill was considered by the Indian Labour Conference in 1945. 
The 8th meeting of the Standing Labour Committee recommended in 1946 
to enact a separate legislation for the unorganized sector including working hours, 
minimum wages and paid holidays.  
A Minimum Wages Bill was introduced in the Central Legislative Assembly on 
11.04.46 to provide for fixation of minimum wages in certain employments. It was 
passed in 1946 and came into force with effect from 15.03.48.  
The Minimum Wages Act, 1948, safeguards the interests of the workers as 
they are vulnerable to exploitation due to illiteracy and lack of bargaining power 
and binds the employers to pay the minimum wages to the workers as fixed under 
the statute for the work performed during a given period, which cannot be 
reduced by collective agreement or an individual contract. The provisions of the 
Act are gender neutral and thus do not discriminate between male and female 
workers. 
  
Appropriate Government 
            Under the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, both the Central and 
the State Governments are appropriate Governments to fix, review and revise the 
minimum wages of the employees employed in the scheduled employments 
under their respective jurisdiction. The appropriate Governments have been 
empowered to notify any employment in the schedule where the number of 
employees is 1000 or more in a State and fix the rates of minimum wages in respect 
of the employees employed therein. Presently, there are 45 scheduled 
employments in the Central Sphere. 
  

Scheduled Employments for Which Central Government Has Fixed Minimum 
Wages under The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
  
S. No. Name of Employment 
1 
Agriculture                                        
2 
Construction/Maintenance of Roads and Building Operations.       
3 
Maintenance of buildings            
4 
Construction and Maintenance of Runways.                           
5 
Gypsum mines.                    
6 
Barites mines.                     
7 
Bauxite mines.                     
8 
Manganese mines.                   
9 
China Clay mines.                  
10 
Kyanite mines.                     
11 
Copper mines.                      
12 
Clay mines.                        
13 
Stone mines.                       
14 
White Clay mines.                  
15 
Orchire mines.                       
16 
Fire Clay mines.                   
17 
Steatite (Soapstone and Talc) Mines. 
18 
Asbestos mines.                    
19
Chromite mines.                   
20 
Quartzite Mines                     
21 
Quartz mines      
22 
Silica mines.               
23 
Magnesite Mines   
24 
Graphite mines.         
25 
Felspar mines.          
26 
Red oxide mines.        
27 
Laterite mines.         
28 
Dolomite mines.         
29 
Iron Ore mines.         
30 
Granite mines.          
31 
Wolfram mines.          
32 
Magnetite mines.        
33 
Rock phosphate mines.    
34 
Hematite mines.         
35 
Marble and Calcite Mines. 
36 
Uranium mines.            
37 
Mica mines.             

38 
Employment in Lignite Mines                               
39 
Employment in Gravel Mines                              
40 
Employment in the Slate  Mines  
41 
Employment in laying down of underground electric, wireless, radio, 
television, telephone, telegraph and overseas communication cables 
and similar other underground cabling, electric lines water supply lines 
and sewerage pipe lines 
42 
Loading, Unloading in Railways Goods Shed 
43
Stone Breaking and Stone Crushing
44
Employment in Sweeping and Cleaning 
45
Watch & Ward
  
Fixing of minimum rates of wages 
  
Section 3(1) (b) of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 mandates the Central 
Government and the State Governments to review the minimum rates of wages 
so fixed in the Scheduled employments in their respective jurisdiction at intervals 
not exceeding five years and revise the minimum rates, if necessary. Section 3(1) 
of the Act stipulating fixation/review/revision of the minimum rates of wages by 
the appropriate Government is reproduced below for ready reference: 
  
Section 3.      Fixing of minimum rates of wages.-  
(1) The appropriate Government shall, in the manner hereinafter 
provided,-- 
(a) fix the minimum rates of wages payable to employees employed 
in an employment specified in Part I or Part II of the Schedule and in an 
employment added to either Part by notification under section 27: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, in respect of 
employees employed in an employment specified in Part II of the 
Schedule, instead of fixing minimum rates of wages under this clause for the 
whole State, fix such rates for a part of the State or for any specified class or 
classes of such employment in the whole State or part thereof;] 
(b) review at such intervals as it may think fit, such intervals not 
exceeding five years, the minimum rates of wages so fixed and revise the 
minimum rates, if necessary: 
Provided that where for any reason the appropriate Government has 
not reviewed the minimum rates of wages fixed by it in respect of any 
scheduled employment within any interval of five years, nothing contained 
in this clause shall be deemed to prevent it from reviewing the minimum 

rates after the expiry of the said period of five years and revising them, if 
necessary, and until they are so revised the minimum rates in force 
immediately before the expiry of the said period of five years shall continue 
in force. 
The minimum rates of wages in the scheduled employments in the 
Central sphere were last revised by the Central Government in 2017. 
Norms for fixation/revision of minimum rates of wages 
The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 has neither defined minimum wages nor has 
it laid down any norms/criteria for fixing the minimum wages.  In 2017, the minimum 
rates of wages for scheduled employments in the central sphere were revised 
based on the norms recommended by the Indian Labour Conference, in 1957 and 
on the basis of judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court delivered in the case of 
Reptakos & Co. Vs. its workers in the year 1992.   
  
The norms recommended by the Indian Labour Conference, in 1957 for fixing 
the minimum wage are as follows: -  
a)        3 consumption units for one wage earner. 
b)        Minimum food requirements of 2700 calories per average 
Indian adult. 
c)        Clothing requirements of 72 yards per annum per family. 
d)        Rent corresponding to the minimum area provided for under 
Government’s Industrial Housing Scheme. 
e)        Fuel, Lighting and other miscellaneous items of expenditure to 
constitute 20% of the total minimum wage. 
Subsequently in 1992 the Hon’ble Supreme Court delivered a historic 
judgement in the case of Reptakos & Co. Vs. its workers directing that children’s 
education, 
medical 
requirement, 
minimum 
recreation 
including 
festivals/ceremonies, provision for old age, marriage etc. should further constitute 
25% of the minimum wage and be used as a guide in fixation of minimum wage. 
  
Procedure for fixation/revision of minimum rates of wages 
i. By Committee method, or 
ii. By notification method. 
Section 5 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 stipulates the following methods 
for fixation/revision of minimum wages.  

In fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled 
employment for the first time under this Act or in revising minimum rates 
of wages so fixed, the appropriate Government shall either— 
(a) appoint as many committees and sub-committees as it  considers 
necessary to hold enquiries and advise it in respect of such fixation or 
revision, as the case may be, or 
(b) by notification in the Official Gazette, publish its proposals for the 
information of persons likely to be affected thereby and specify a date, 
not less than two months from the date of the notification, on which the 
proposals will be taken into consideration. 
(2)     After considering the advice of the committee or committees 
appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1), or as the case may be, all 
representations received by it before the date specified in the 
notification under clause (b) of that sub-section, the appropriate 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, or, as the 
case may be, revise the minimum rates of wages in respect of each 
scheduled employment, and unless such notification otherwise  provides, 
it shall come into force on the expiry of three months from the date of its 
issue: 
Provided that where the appropriate Government proposes to revise 
the minimum rates of wages by the mode specified in clause (b) of 
subsection (1), the appropriate Government shall consult the Advisory 
Board also. 
Provision of Variable Dearness Allowance (VDA) 
In order to protect the minimum wages against inflation, the Central 
Government mooted the idea of Variable Dearness Allowance (VDA) in terms of 
recommendation of the Labour Ministers’ Conference held in 1988. Accordingly, 
the appropriate Governments revise the minimum rates of wages from time to time 
as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. In the Central sphere, VDA 
on the minimum rates of wages is revised effective from 1st April and 1st October 
every year.  
National Floor Level Minimum Wage (NFLMW) 
            The concept of NFLMW dates back to 1991 when the National Commission 
on Rural Labour, chaired by Shri Jhinabhai Darjee, had inter-alia recommended 
that following the approach of Planning Commission in determining the poverty 
line in terms of Minimum consumption expenditure, and taking into account the 
average number of wage earners in an agricultural household and the number of 
days worked in a year by such earner, the daily wage rate comes to about Rs. 20 
at current prices (1990). While this will be the floor level, the Government at the 

Center and the State should be free to fix minimum wages above this level on the 
basis of skills, areas, occupations or employment or other local factors. 
             
As a step towards moving for a uniform wage structure, as recommended 
by the NCRL, and to reduce the disparity in minimum wages across the country, 
the concept of National Floor Level Minimum Wage (NFLMW) was mooted on a 
voluntary basis.  NFLMW is revised from time to time taking into account the 
increase in the Consumer Price Index Number for Industrial Workers. This may be 
seen from the following table: 
Statement showing the year-wise change in NFLMW 
S. No.
Year
NFLMW
(inRs.) per day 
Remarks
1.
1991
20/-
NCRL recommended
  
2.
1996
35/-
Central Government mooted the concept
  
3.
1998
40/-
Based on increase in CPI (AL)
  
4.
1999
45/-
-Do-
  
5.
2002
50/-
Based on increase in CPI(IW)
  
6.
2004
66/-
Based on increase in CPI(IW) and Report of the Working 
Group of the Ministry for the year 2003 
7.
2007
80/-
Based on increase in CPI(IW)
  
8.
2009
100/-
-Do-
  
9.
2011
115/-
-Do-
  
10.
2013
137/-
-Do-
11
2015
160/-
-Do-
12
2017
176/-
-Do-
  
            Since the NFLMW presently is a non-statutory measure, the State 
Governments are persuaded to fix/revise minimum wages in such a way that in 
none of the scheduled employments the minimum wage is less than NFLMW.  
 
 
 
 

PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936 
            The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 regulates payment of wages to workers 
employed in industries and to ensure speedy and effective remedy to them 
against illegal deductions and/or unjustified delay caused in paying wages in 
current coin, or currency notes or by cheque or by crediting in the bank account 
of the workers. 
            The Payment of Wages (Amendment) Act, 2017- Section 6 of the Payment 
of Wages Act, 1936 has been amended on 16.02.2017 to enable making payment 
of wages in current coin or currency notes or by cheque or by crediting in the 
bank account of the workers. The amendment made also enables that the 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
industrial or other establishment, the employer of which shall pay to every person 
employed in such industrial or other establishment, the wages only by cheque or 
by crediting the wages in the bank account. 
            Provision for making payment only by cheque or by crediting in the bank 
account of an employee, in respect of industrial or other establishments namely 
Railways, Air transport services, Mines and Oil fields in the Central Sphere has been 
notified on 26.04.2017. 
            The wage ceiling for applicability of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, 
was   fixed   at   Rs.   1600/-  p.m.   in   1982. This wage ceiling has been periodically 
revised on the basis of the Consumer Expenditure Survey brought out by the 
National Sample Survey Office, after every five years. The Central Government has 
enhanced the wage ceiling from Rs.18,000/- to Rs. 24,000/- per month w.e.f. 
29.08.2017 for applicability of the Act. 
Enforcement    of    the   Payment   of    Wages   Act, 1936    and   the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
The Government is committed to enhance the welfare and well-being of 
workers in the organised and unorganised sector and ensure implementation of 
the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. The 
enforcement of various labour laws including the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
and the Minimum Wages Act,  1948  is ensured  at two levels. While in the Central 
Sphere, the enforcement is secured through the Inspecting officers of the Chief 
Labour Commissioner (Central) commonly designated as Industrial Relations 
Machinery (CIRM), the compliance in the State Sphere is ensured through the 
State Enforcement Machinery. They conduct regular inspections and in the event 
of detection of any case of non-payment or under-payment of minimum wages, 
they advise the employers to make payment of the shortfall of wages. In case of 
non-compliance, penal provisions prescribed in the Act are taken recourse to.  
