Fi le No. S-250121 061201 5-lSH-ll
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN. RAFI MARG. NEW DELHI
Dated: 27 .01.2016
Office Memorandum
Subject: Model Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services)Act, 2015
The undersigned is directed to refer to the subject mentioned above and to forward herewith a copy of the
draft Note for the Cabinet on the amendments to the Model Shops and Establishments (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 2015.
2. 
All concerned Ministries/Departments are reouested to furnish their comments/advice on the draft Note
for the Cabinet to this Ministy within 15 days of receipt of the draft Note for the Cabinet in view of paragraph 57 of
the Hanbook on Writing Cabinet Note, which states that " Commencing from the date, the draft note is received by
the Ministry/Department being consulted, the comments of consuited Ministries/Departments shall, in all cases,
be finalized and communicated to the sponsoring Ministry/Department in'15 days"
Enclosures as above.
(flajesh Kumar)
Under Secretary to the Goveinment of India
Fax No. 011-23473305.
(i) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(ii) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Paryavaran Bhawan, New Delhi-1 10001.
(iii) 
The Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(iv) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Human Resources Development, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(v) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-l10001,
(vi) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Transport Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(vii) The Secretary, Ministry of Coal, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-1 1000'1.
(viii). The Secretary, Ministry of Mines, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(ix) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-l10001.
(x) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(xi) 
The Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001.
(xii). The Secretary, Ministry of Textiles, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi-1 10001.
(xiii). The Secretary, Ministry of Steel, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi-1'10001
(xiv). Director General, DGMS, Dhanbad
(xv). Director General, DGFASLI, Mumbai - Member Secretary.
Under Secretary to the Government of India
Fax No. 011-23473305.
Copy to:
1. Prime Minister's Office, (Kind Attention:
2. JS & FA.
Copy for information to:
1. Cabinet Secretariat (Kind Attention Ms.
2. PS to LEM (3). PPS to Secretary (L&E).
Shri Anurag Jain, Joint Secretary), South Block, New Delhi
Sanjukta Ray, Director), Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi.
(4) PS to AS (L&E).

SECRET
F. No. 5-250 t2 | 6 | 2015-tsH-tl
O 
Government of India
Ministry of Labour and EmPloYment
Shram Shakti Bhawan, Rafi Marg,
New Delhi' dated 
'2015'
DRAFT NOTLFOR THE qABINET
Subject: Model Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and
Conditions of Service) Act, 2015
The Shops and Establishment Act is a state legislation enacted by various states
which regulates operation of shops and establishment in that state. The Act is
applicable to non-hazardous manufacturing units employing less than 10 workers. The
existing law regulates opening and closing time of establishment, Attendance and
payment of Wages, Holidays and Leaves, Conditions of Employment, and includes
provisions for Health, Safety and Welfare. The Government has been receiving 
suggestions from time to time to enact a model central law which the states could
consider for enforcement either by adopting the central law or making necessary
modifications by amending the state laws.
2. Background
It has been represented to the central government that the enforcement of the
state Shops and Establishment Act by various states has brought about the following
inadequacies that have affected the ease of doing business by the shops and
establishments covered under the Act:-
1. Rigidity in Opening And Closing of establishments
2. Discourages Women in employment
3. Difficutties in Registration & Annual Renewal
4. Problems in Maintenance of Statutory Records
5. Arbitrariness in Statutory Inspections
SECRET
Page 1 of 5

SECRET
o 
F' No's'e2:no;l1l'"1i11;i'-"
Ministry of Labour and EmPloYment
3. Proposal
3.1. The present proposal, inter-alia, provides for the following:
1. A Model Shops and Establishment Act to be formulated by the Union
Government, on the pattern of which states will modify their individual Act.
2. Covers only establishments employing ten or more workers except
manufacturing units
3. Freedom to operate 365 days in a year.
4. Freedom for opening/closing time of establishment
5. Women to be permitted during night shift.
6. No discrimination against women in the matter of recruitment, training, transfer or
promotions
7. Online one common Registration through a simplified procedure.
8. Power of Government to make rules regarding adequate measures to be taken
by the employer for the safety and health of workers
9. Clean and safe drinking water
10. Lavatory, Crdche, First Aid and Canteen by group of establishments, in case, it is
not possible due to constraint in space or otherwise by individual establishment
11.Twelve days casual cum sick leave.
12. One day earned leave for every twenty days of work performed (can be
accommodated upto 45 days)
13.Five paid holidays forfestivals in addition to three national holidays.
14. Exemption of highly skilled workers (for example workers employed in 1.T., Bio-
Technology and R&D division) from. daily working hours of t hrs and weekly
working hrs of 48 hrs subject to maximum 125 over-time hrs in a quarter.
15. Facilitators may be appointed by the Government with the following duties -
(i) 
Supply information and advice to employers and workers concerning
complying with the provisions of the Act.
SECRET
Page 2 of 5

SECRET
o 
t'"l;t"-"1l"o,,iffilt,it-"
Ministry of Labour and Employment
(ii) 
inspect the establishment based on inspection scheme framed by the
Government
16. Offences
1. Opportunity for compliance of irregularities
2. Graded punishment
3. lrregularities other than safety related are compoundable
4. 
Justification:
The ModelAct would bring about uniformity in the legislative provisions, making it
easier for all the states to adopt it and thereby ensuring uniform working conditions
across the country.
5. 
Tripartite consultation meeting has also been held to discuss the Model Shop &
Establishment Act was also held in which participant of the Trade union, Employees
Organisation and state Government shared their views on the proposals. The Minutes
of the Meeting is placed at Annexure-ll.
6. 
Inter-Ministerial Gonsultation: (To be made after approval of competent
authority).
7. Financial lmplications
7.1 There are no financial implications of the proposal for the Government sector.
8. Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy (PLCP)
8.1. Legislative Department vide D.O. Letter No 11(35)/2013-Ll dated 05.02.14 has
informed that as per the decisions taken in the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) held on 10.1.14 on PLCP, every Ministry shall proactively publish the proposed
SECRET
Page 3 of 6

SECRET
o 
t'tl;t;"t"0,12/5/201s'sH'l
Ministry of Labour and Employment
legislations both on the internet as also through other means. Accordingly, it is
proposed to put the draft bill in the public domain.
9. Approval of the Cabinet Sought
9.1. Approval of the Cabinet is solicited to the proposals contained in para 4 and to
consider the Model Shop and Establishments Act given at Annexure-l (page
of the Notelfto be vetted bv the Leqislative Department. Ministru of
Law and Justice in consultation with the Ministru of Labour and Emplovment) and
to approve the same for circulation among State Governments to modify their existing
Shops and Establishments Act on the pattern of the former.
9.2. The Statement of lmplementation Schedule in respect of above proposals has
been given at Appendix-|. (page ....) of the Note.
9.3 The Statement of Equity, Innovation and Public Accountability is at Appendix-ll
(page ....) of the Note.
10. Approval of the Minister-ln-Charge
10.1. The proposals, Note for the Cabinet and the Model Act have been duly approved
by the Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge) Labour and Employment
Minister.
(P.P. Mitra)
Principal Labour and Employment Advisor
Tele fax No. 23731588
Director (Cabinet),
Gabinet Secretariat,
Room No.12, Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New Delhi 110004.
SECRET
Page 4 of 6

o
SECRET
F. No. S-25Ot2l 6 12015-lSH-l I
Government of India
Ministry of Labour and EmPloYment
APPENDIX - I
(Reference paragraph ....... ol the Note)
STATEMENT OF IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE
SUBJECT: - Model Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and
Conditions of Service) Act, 2015
(P.P. Mitra)
Principal Labour and Employment Adviser
Te1.No.23731588
Gist of 
decision
required
Projected benefits/
results
Time frame and manner
implementation / rePort
the Gabinet Secretariat
of
to
(1)
(21
(3)
Approval of the Cabinet is
solicited to the proposals
contained in para 3 and
to consider the Model
Shop and Establishments
Act given at Annexure
page 
of
the Note)(fo be vetted by
the 
Legislative
Department, Ministry of
Law and Justice in
consultation with the
Ministry of Labour and
Employment) and to
approve the same for
circulation among State
Governments to modify
their existing Shops and
Establishments Act on
the pattern of the former.
The proposals would
ensure uniformity of
enforcement of the
Act in the states and
UTs and facilitate the
ease of
business
doing
and
generate employment
opportunities.
After approval of the Cabinet,
the Model Act will be
circulated among all
states/UTs with a request to
adopt or carry out necessary
amendments in 
their
respective state laws online
with the model Act.
SECRET
Page 5 of 6

a
SECRET
F. No. S-zsOLzl 61201s-lsH-ll
Government of India
Ministry of Labour and Employment
APPENDIX - II
(Reference paragraph of the Note)
STATEMENT OF EQUITY, INNOVATION AND PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY
SUBJECT: - Model Shops and Establishments (Requlation of Emplovment and
Conditions of Service) Act. 2015
SI
No
The required
qoal
How does the proposal advance this goal?
1. Equity 
or
inclusiveness
The proposed changes through the Model Act would
bring about uniformity and equity in the provisions of the
law for enforcement and would also be inclusive in
nature as it would provide social security benefits to all
covered employees. lt would also facilitate the ease of
doing business and create more jobs
2.
Innovation
The on-line one common Registration through a
simplified procedure would simplify business process
and make them much more transparent.
3.
Public
Accountability
Enforcement is likely to improve which would also help
improve public accountability and transparency.
(P.P. Mitra)
Principal Labour and Employment Adviser
Te1.No.23731588
SECRET
Page 6 of 5

I
The Model Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and
Gonditions of Service) Act, 2015
An Act to regulate the employment and other conditions of service of workers
employed in shops and establishments.
Whereas it is expedient to consolidate the laws relating to regulation of
employment and other conditions of service in shops and establishments'
Ghapter | - Preliminary
1. 
Short title, extent, commencement and application
(a) This Act may be called the Modet Shops and Establishments (Regulation
of Employment and Conditions of Service)Act, 2015.
(b) lt extends to the whole of lndia.
(c) lt shall apply to the shops and establishments employing ten or more
workers.
2. 
Definitions: In this Act unless the context otherwise requires: -
(a) "government" under this Act shall be the Government of the State or the
Union Territory in which such shop or establishment is situated.
(b) "day" means a period of 24 hours beginning at mid night'
(c) "worker" means any person (except an apprentice under Apprentice Act,
1961) employed to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational,
clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express
or implied.
(d) "employer" means an owner or a person who has the ultimate control over
the affairs of a shop or an establishment. -
Provided that-
(i) 
in the case of a firm or other association of individuals,
any one of the individual partners or members thereof shall
be deemed to be the emPloYer ;
(ii) in the case of a company, any one of the directors shall be
deemed to be the employer;

in the case of an establishment owned or controlled by the
Central Government or any Government, or any local
authority, the person or persons appointed to manage the
affairs of such an establishment by the Central
Government, the State Government or the local authority,
as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the employer.
(e) "establishment" means any premises, not being the premises of a factory, or
a shop, wherein any trade, buSiness, manufacture, Or any work in connection
with, or incidental or ancillary thereto and includes a premises wherein
journalistic or printing work, or business of banking, insurance, stocks and
shares, brokerage or produce exchange is carried on, or which is used as
theatre, cinema, or for any other public amusement or entertainment or
where the clerical and other establishment of a factory, to whom the
provisions of the Factories Act, 1948, do not apply, work;
(f) "shop" means any premises where goods are sold, either by retail or
wholesale or where services are rendered to customers, and includes an
office, a store-room, go-down, warehouse or workhoUse or Work place for
distribution or packaging or repackaging or finished goods is carried on; but
does not include a establishment or a shop attached to a factory where
persons employed in such establishment are allowed the benefits provided
under the Factories Act, 1948'
(g) "wages" means all remuneration (whether by way of salary, allowances or
otherwise) expressed in terms of money or capable of being so expressed
which woutd, if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled,
be payable to a person employed in respect of his employment or of work
done in such employment, and includes: -
any remuneration payable under any award or settlement between
the parties or order of a court or tribunal;
any remuneration to which the person employed is entitled in
respect of overtime work or holidays or any leave period;
2
(iii)
ii.

o
iii. any additional remuneration payable under the terms of
employment (whether called a bonus or by any other name);
iv. any sum which by reason of the termination of employment of the
person employed is payable under any law, contract or instrument
which provides for the payment of such sum, whether with or
without deductions, but does not provide for the time within which
the payment is to be made;
v. any sum to which the person employed is entitled under any
scheme framed under any law for the time being in force,
vi. house rent allowance;
but does not include-
(i) 
any bonus payable under this Act, which does not form part of the
remuneration payable under the terms of employment or which is
not payable under any award or settlement between the parties or
order of a Court:
(ii) the value of any house-accommodation, or of the supply of light,
Water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any service
excluded from the computation of wages by a general or special
order of the Government;
(iii) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident
fund,andtheinterestwhichmayhaveaccruedthereon;
(iv) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession;
(v) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses
entailed on him by the nature of his employment; or
(vi) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment in cases
other than those specified in sub-clause (d)'
(h) "week" means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on saturday
night or such other night as may be approved in writing for a particular area
by the Chief Facilitator;

o
(i) The terms used in this Act but not defined, shall have the same meaning as
assigned to them in any other relevant labour laws unless it is repugnant to
the context;
3. The provisions of the Act not to apply to certain persons, shops and
establishments.-
(1) The provisions of this Act shall have no application to-
a) workers occupying positions of confidential, managerial or supervisory
character in a shop or in an establishmeni.
b) worker whose work is inherently intermittent, as in the case of a traveler or
canvasser;
c) offices of Government or local authorities;
d) offices of the Reserve Bank of India;
e) establishments for the treatment or care of the sick, infirm, destitute or
mentally unfit; and
0 members of the family of an employer.
(2) A list of the workers referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be displayed
on the website of the shop or establishment and in absence of the website at a
conspicuous place in the shop or establishment and a copy thereof shall be sent to
the Facilitator concerned.
(3) powers of the Government to exempt any class of shops and establishments
from the operation of the Act.-The Government may, in public interest, by
notification in the Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions as it may impose in
this behalf, any shop or establishment or any class of shops or establishments from
the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act.
(4) Withdrawal of exemption by the Government.-The Government may, likewise
by notification in the Gazette, withdraw in whole or in part, permanently, or for such
period as may be specifie d, any exemption granted under sub-section (3)'
4. Savings.- Nothing contained in this Act shall adversely affect any right or
privilege to which any worker may be entitled, under any law, award, agreement,
contract, custom or usage, in force on that date.

t
ChaPter-ll
Registration of shops and establishments
5. Registration of Shop and Establishment:- Every shop and establishment shall
obtain a Unique Labour ldentification Number (LlN) from the Government'
GhaPter lll
ResPonsibilitY of em PloYer
6 (i). No Discrimination against female worker -
No female worker shall be discriminated against in matters of recruitment, training,
transfers or promotions or wages.
(ii). No woman shall be required or allowed to work in shops and establishments
except between the hours of 6A.M. and 9 P.M'
provided that where the Government or any person, authorized by it in this
behalf, is satisfied that in shop or establishment, provision of shelter, rest room,
night creche, ladies' toilet, adequate protection of their dignity, honour & safety'
protection from sexual harassment, and their transportation from the shop or
establishment premises to the door step of their residence exists, it may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, after obtaining the consent of the woman worker
allow her to work between I PM to 6 AM subject to such conditions as may be
specified therein.
7. Health and safety of workers - An employer shall be responsible for providing
constant and adequate supervision of any worker employed in an establishment so
as to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act relating to health and safety
and for taking all steps necessary to prevent accidents. The Government shall make
rules regarding the adequate measures to be taken by an employer for the safety
and health of its workers as may be prescribed'
8. Fixing of hours of work and spread over'

I
(1) (i) No adult worker shall be required to work for more than 48 hours in a week
and g hours in a day and no worker shall be asked to work continuously for more
than 5 hours unless he has been given a break of not less than half an hour
provided that limit of working hours or of weekly rest may be relaxed in case of work
of urgent nature.
(ii) The total number of hours of work in a shift including the rest interval shall
not exceed 10/, hours in any establishment and in case a worker is entrusted with
intermittent nature of work, urgent work, the spread over shall not exceed 12 hours.
(iii) Any working hour beyond nine hours a day or forty eight hours a week shall
be treated as over time. However, the total number of overtime hours shall not
exceed one hundred and twenty five hours in a quarter (three months)'
(2) The Government shall make rules to,-
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal
working day for the workers employed in the establishment, inclusive
of one or more sPecified intervals;
(b) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be
allowed to all the workers employed in the establishment and for the
paymentofremunerationinrespectofsuchdaysofrest;
(c) provide for payment of work, on a day of rest, at a rate equal to the
double the rate of his wages.
(3) The provisions of sub-sub-section of (i) & (ii) of sub-section (1) shall' in
relation to the following classes of workers employed in such establishment,
apply only to such extent, and subject to such conditions, as may be
prescribed, namelY :-
(a) workers engaged on urgent Work, or in any emergency which cou|d
not have been foreseen or prevented;
(b) workers engaged in the nature of preparatory or complementary work
which must necessarily be carried on outside the normal hours of work
laid down in the rules;
(c) workers engaged in any work which for technical reasons has to be
completed before the daY is over;

10.
(d) workers engaged in a work which cannot be carried on except at times
dependent on the irregular action for natural forces.
(e) Highly skilled workers (for example workers working in the
establishments of Information Technology, Bio-Technology and
Research & Development Divisions).
9. Wages for overtime work
Where any worker is required to work on any day in excess of t hours and 48
hours in a week, he shall be entitled to wages at twice the rate of wages.
Shift working/rest
(i) 
More than one shift may be worked in a Department or any Section of
a Department of the establishment at the discretion of the employer. lf
more than one shift is worked, the worker may be required to work in
any shift at the discretion of the employer.
An establishment may work on all days in a week subject to the
condition that every worker shall be allowed weekly holiday of at least
24 consecutive hours of rest.
lf a worker is denied weekly holiday, the compensatory leave for this
shall be given within two months of such weekly holiday.
The period and hours of work in a week for all classes of workers in
such shift shall be informed to all workers in writing and shall be sent
to the Facilitator electronically or otherwise.
ChaPter lV
Leave and holidays
Annual leave, casual and sick leave and other holidays
1) Every worker shall be allowed a weekly holiday with wages. Provided that
Government may fix different days as weekly holiday for different types
establishments or areas.
2) Every worker shall be entitled to eight days' casual leave with wages in every
calendar year. Such leave shall be credited into the account of the worker on
a quarterly basis.
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
11.

o
Every worker who has worked for a period of 240 days or more during a
calendar year shall be allowed during the subsequent calendar year, leave
with wages for a number of days calculated at the rate of one day for every
twenty days of work performed by him during the previous calendar year;
worker shall be permitted to accumulate earned leave upto a maximum of 45
days. However, if the employer refuses to sanction the leave due when
applied 15 days in advance, then the worker will have a right to encash leave
in excess of 45 days. Provided further that if a worker is entitled to leave
under this section, is discharged by his employer before he has been allowed
the leave, or if, having applied for and having been refused the leave, he
quits his employment on account of retirement, resignation, death or
permanent disability, the employer shall pay him full wages for the period of
leave due to him.
A worker shall be entitled to eight paid festival holidays in a calendar year,
namely, lndependence Day, Republic Day and Gandhi Jayanti and five such
other festival holidays as may be agreed to between employer and the
workers, before the commencement of the year.
Explanation 1 : For the purpose of sub-section (3)-
a) any days of lay-off, by agreement or contract or as permissible under the
model standing orders or standing order certified under Industrial
Employment (SO) Act, 1946.
b) in the case of a female worker, maternity leave as provided for in the
Maternity Benefits Act, 1961.
the leave earned in the year prior to that in which the leave is enjoyed;
he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident
arising out of and in the course of his employment;
shall be deemed to be days on which the worker has worked in a shop for the
purpose of computation of the period of 240 days or more, but shall not earn leave
for these days.
Explanation 2: The leave admissible under sub-section (3) shall be exclusive of all
holidays whether occurring during or at either end of the period of leave.
3)
4)
5)
c)
d)

ChaPter V
Welfare provisions
12. Drinking water
The employer shall make effective arrangements to provide and maintain at
suitable points conveniently situated for all persons employed in the establishment,
a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water.
13. Latrines and urinals
The employer shall provide sufficient latrine and urinal for male and female
as may be prescribed and these shall be so conveniently situated as may be
accessible for the workers employed in the establishment.
Provided that several employers, may provide common facilities, in case it is
not possible, due to constraint in space or otherwise.
14. Greche
In every establishment wherein thirty or more woman workers or fifty or more
workers are employed and even there shall be provided and maintained a suitable
creche. Provided that if a group of establishments, so decide to provide a common
crdche within a radius of one kilometer then the same shall be permitted by the
Chief Facilitator, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order.
15. First Aid
Every employer shall provide at the place of work first-aid facilities as may be
prescribed.
16. Canteen
The Government shall require the employer to provide and maintain in the
establishment, wherein not less than one hundred workers are employed or
ordinarily employed to maintain a canteen for the use of its workers. Provided
further that if a group of establishments, so decide to provide a common canteen,
then the same shall be permitted by the Chief Facilitator by an order, subject to
such conditions as may be specified in the order.

o
Chapter Vl
Penalties and Miscellaneous provisions
17. Appointment of Chief Facilitator and Facilitators and their powers (1)
The Government may, by notification, appoint a Chief Facilitator and Facilitators
who shall exercise the powers conferred on them under sub-section (4) throughout
the State or such geographical limits assigned to them, in relation to establishments
situated in such State or geographical limits, as the case may be.
(2) The Government may, by notification, lay down an inspection scheme
which shall provide for generation of a web-based inspection schedule.
(3) Every Facilitator appointed under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to
be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Act 1860 (45
0f 1 860).
(4) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Government, a
facilitator may, within the local limits for which he is appointed -
(i) (a) supply information and advice to employers and workers
concerning the most 
effective means of complying with the
provisions of this Act.
(b) inspect the establishment based on inspection scheme referred
to in sub-section (2);
(ii) Subject to clause (i), the Facilitator may -
(a) examine any person who is found in any premises of the
establishment and whom, the Facilitator has reasonable cause
to believe, is a worker of the establishment;
(b) require any person to give any information, which is in his
power to give with respect to the names and addresses of the
persons;
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register, record of wages
or notices or portions thereof as the Facilitator may consider
relevant in respect of an offence under this Act and which the
10

o
Facilitator has reason to believe has been committed by the
employer;
bring to the notice of the Government defects or abuses not
covered by the law for the time being in force; and
exercise such other powers as may be prescribed'
(5) Any person required to produce any
information required by a Facilitator under sub-section
legally bound to do so within the meaning of section
lndian Penal Code (45 of 1860)'
document or to give anY
(4) shall be deemed to be
175 and section 176 o't the
(6) The provisions of the code of criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)'
shall, so far as may be, apply to the search or seizure under sub-section (4) as they
apply to the search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under
section 94 of the said Code.
18. Maintenance of register and records
Everyemp|oyershal|maintainsuchregistersandrecordsasmaybe
prescribedbytheGovernment.Suchrecordsmaybemaintainede|ectronica||yor
manually. However at the time of inspection by a Facilitator, a hard copy of such
records if demanded, shall be submitted duly signed by the employer'
19. Annual Return
Every employer of a shop or an establishment shall send an annual return in
the prescribed form and as far as possible electronically to the authority as may be
prescribed.
20. Penalty for contravention of provisions
(1)WhoevercontravenestheprovisionsoftheActandtherulesmade
thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and
in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues'
(d)
(e)
\L

o
Provided that the total amount of fine shall not exceed rupees two thousand
per workers emploYed.
{2) lf any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub-
section (1) is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of
compliance of the same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent
conviction with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
21. Penalty in the accidents
Save as is otherwise expressly provided in this Act, where an employer on
being held guilty of contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule
made thereunder which has resulted in an accident causing serious bodily injury or
death of a worker, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
months or with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees which may be
extended to five lakh rupees or with both.
22. Penalty for obstructions
(1) Whoever obstructs a Facilitator in the discharge of his duties under
this Act or refuses or willfully neglects to afford the Facilitator any reasonable facility
for making any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorized by or
under this Act in relation to an establishments, shalf be punishable with fine which
may extend to two lakh ruPees.
(2) Whoever willfully refuses to produce on the demand of a facilitator any
register or other document kept in pursuance of this Act or the rules made
thereunder or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has reason
to believe to prevent any person from appearing before, or being examined by, a
facilitator acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
provided that the total amount of fine shall not exceed rupees two thousand
per workers emPloYed.
23. Cognizance of offences
(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this
Act and the rules made thereunder unless a complaint in respect thereof is made
within three months of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence
t2

a
came to the knowledge of the facilitator and a complaint is filed in that regard
thereby.
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made
by a facilitator, complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on
which the offence is alleged to have been committed.
(Z) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act or the
rules made thereunder
24. Compounding of offences,- .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any offence punishable under this Act, not being
an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with
fine, may, on an application of the accused person, either before or after the
institution of any prosecution, be compounded by a Gazetted officer, as the
appropriate Government may, by notification, specify, for a surn of fifty per cent. of
the maximum fine provided for such offence, in the manner as may be prescribed:
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an offence committed by a
person toittre second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the date
(a) of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded;
(b) of commission of similar offence for which such person was earlier
convicted.
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the powers to
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the
Government.
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such
manner as may be Prescribed.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no
prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in
relation to whom the offence is so compounded.
(6) Where the cornposition of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub-
L3

I
section (1) in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is pending
and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person
against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(7) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent to twenty per cent of the
maximum fine provided for the offence, in addition to such fine.
(8) No offence punishable under the provisions of this Code shall be compounded
except under and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
25. Protection of officers and their agents from personal liability. - No suit,
prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any public servant or any
other person in the service of the Central or Government, acting under direction of
any such public servant, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder'
26. power to grant exemptions. - The Government or any officer empowered
in this behalf may, by an order in writing, exempt from the operation of all or any of
the provisions of this Act for any period it is considered, any establishment or class
thereof or any employer or worker or class of employers or workers to whom this
Act applies on such terms and conditions as it may think fit.
27. power to make rules. - (1) The Government may by notification make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Such rules may, among other things, contain detailed procedure
regarding registration of establishments, prescription of registration and / or renewal
fee, maintenance of record, manner and form in which the registers are kept, the
officers who may be empowered to inspect registers and call for information as
required under the Act, the Authority by which and the manner in which the
prosecution shall be instituted, the conditions subject to which any exemption under
the Act shall be given, the manner in which the employer shall be required to keep
exhibited in his premises particular notices relating to close day, closing and
opening hours, submission of annual returns by the employer and such other
particulars as may be prescribed, to provide for safeguard of health, safety and
welfare of workers.
1.4

o
(3) The Government may further make any such provisions in the rules
for the proper enforcement of the provisions of the Act and the rules made
thereunder as it may think proper from time to time'
(4) Every rule made by the Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where
it consists of two Houses or, where such Legislature consists of one House, before
that House.
15
