OM No. A 1/Misc. 2020- Admn. II 
Government of India 
NITI Aayog 
 
NITI Bhawan, Sansad Marg 
New Delhi, the 19th May, 2020 
 
 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
 
Sub. : Sixteenth Meeting  of the Empowered Group on Coordinating with 
Private Sector, NGOs and International Organisations for COVID-
19 related Response Activities: Retail Industry 
 
 
The sixteenth (16th) meeting of the Empowered Group 6 constituted vide 
OM No. 40-3/2020/DM-I (A) dated 29/03/2020 under the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 with the industry representatives from the Shopping 
and Retail industry was held on 18 May, 2020. 
2. 
The minutes of the 16th Meeting of the Empowered Group are annexed 
for necessary action. 
 
3. 
This issues with the approval of the CEO, NITI Aayog. 
 
 
 
 
(Sanyukta Samaddar) 
Adviser  
NITI Aayog 
011-23096733 
 
Copy to:- 
 
1. Sr. PPS to CEO, NITI Aayog 
2. Members of the Empowered Committee (6) 
3. List of participants as annexed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Government of India 
NITI Aayog 
Sixteenth Meeting of Empowered Group 6 on Key Takeaways in Engagement with 
Private sector, IOs and NGOs and Leveraging them in COVID-19 Response  
May 18, 2020  
The sixteenth meeting of the Empowered Group 6 constituted vide O.M No. 40-3/2020/DM-
I(A) dated 29/03/2020 under the Disaster Management Act 2005 was held under the 
Chairmanship of CEO, NITI Aayog, on 18, May 2020, to address the issues pertaining to 
leveraging the 3 key stakeholders in creating effective solutions for Covid19 response The 
members of the Empowered Committee include Dr Vijayaraghavan (PSA); Shri Kamal 
Kishore (Member, NDMA); Shri Sandeep Mohan Bhatnagar (Member, CBIC); Shri P. Harish 
(AS, MEA); Shri Vikram Doraiswami (AS, MEA); Shri Anil Malik (AS, MHA) Shri Gaurav 
Shrestha (JS, PMO), Ms. Aishvarya Singh (DS, PMO) and Ms. Tina Soni (DS, Cabinet 
Secretariat). The participants from NITI Aayog included Ms. Sanyukta Samaddar (Adviser, 
SDG, NITI Aayog). 
2. Apart from the above-mentioned members, the list of other participants from the Retailers 
Asspciation of India (ROI) is annexed.  
3. CEO, NITI Aayog briefed all participants about the objectives of the meeting and the 
assistance, support, and mobilization required from the participants. He focussed on the 
importance of the retail industry for the economy, in terms of jobs supported by the industry. 
He remarked that the Government of India is aware of the issues being faced by the industry 
and will take adequate measures to support it. 
4. The participants briefed the members of the about the various issues being faced by the 
industry post the COVID-19 outbreak and the strong hit in case of no government 
intervention. The key issues raised by Shri Rakesh Biyani (Future Retail), Shri BS Nagesh 
(Shoppers Stop Group), Kulin Lalbhai (Arvind Group), Shri Amit Agrawal (Dmart) and other 
members are summarised:  
 
i) 
Retail industry is one of the key engines of employment and consumption and 
contributes around 40% to consumption and accounts for 10 percent of the nation’s 
GDP. The industry contributes around 8 percent of the nation’s total employment. 
While food and grocery retail employ 21 million people, apparel retail provides jobs 
to 8 million. Sub-industries (jewellery and watches, electronics and appliances, health 
&beauty, home interiors) employs at least 22 million people. The sector contributes 
around Rs 4000 crore per month as GST.  
 
ii) 
The retail sector has taken a strong hit due to lack of lack of cash flow, due to capital 
tied up in inventory; lack of support from banks and high rental costs. Measures to 
revive the retail sector are direly needed in the form of permissions to allow 
operations of all retail formats, and RBI support in the form of moratorium extension, 
debt waivers etc. 

 
iii) 
Immediate support to the retail sector will restart the cash cycle in the economy. 
While revenues are close to zero for the month of April and May, they are likely to 
remain at only 50-60% levels for the next 4- 6 months at best. Support to retail will 
benefit the entire production and supply chain linked to retail including Micro, Small 
and Medium enterprises (MSMES), Distributors, C & F agents and Real estate sector. 
It will kick-start a consumption led recovery in the economy.  
 
iv) 
Almost 3 million jobs directly in the retail sector could be at risk. Associated sector 
that depend upon retail would also be impacted. In Textile sector alone, across the 
entire value chain almost 10 million jobs are at risk. Finally, it will prevent NPAs in 
the financial system. Retail sector represents an investment of Rs 2.5 lakh crore and 
almost Rs 75,000 crore could turn NPA.  
 
5. The participants highlighted that organised retail needs to be supported on account of the 
seasonal nature of their inventory and the compounding of several issues such as outstanding 
rentals, delayed salaries, loan payables etc. 
6.  Shri Amitabh Kant (CEO, NITI Aayog and Chairman, Empowered Group 6), in his 
response, reiterated the need for all stakeholders to work together. He agreed to the views that 
the shopping and retail industry has a cascading effect on several sectors of the economy, 
given the scale of employment and linked supply chain. It was also decided by the group that 
detailed proposals will be taken up by EG 6 with Ministry of Home Affairs and Reserve Bank 
of India. 
9. The meeting concluded with vote of thanks by the Chairman. 
 
*****  
 
        Annexure-I 
List of Participants 
 
1. BS Nagesh, Chairman-RAI, and Non- Executive Chairman, Shoppers Stop 
2. Rakesh Biyani, Managing Director, Future Retail 
3. Kulin Lalbhai, Executive Director, Arvind Ltd. 
4. Rahul Mehta, Chief Mentor & President, Clothing Manufacturers Association of India 
(CMAI) 
5. Ashish Dikshit, Managing Director, Aditya Birla Fashion & Retail Ltd. 
6. Kumar Rajgopalan, CEO, Retailers Association of India (CMAI) 
7. Lalit Agarwal, Chairman and Managing Director, V Mart Retail 
