 
 
 
 
Date: October 22, 2013 
To 
Dr. Aman Deep Singh  
PS to Minister of Corporate Affairs, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
New Delhi. 
 
Subject: Giving recommendations and seeking clarifications in CSR rules of the new 
Companies Act, 2013 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
It is my pleasure to write to you on behalf of the Retailers Association of India (RAI)! 
 
Retailers Association of India (RAI) is the unified voice of Indian retailers. RAI works with all 
the stakeholders for creating the right environment for the growth of the modern retail industry in 
India. It encourages, develops and supports retailers to become modern and adopt best practices 
that will delight customers.  
 
RAI is the representative body of Retailers in India having over 900 member establishments 
including large and small retailers in the country and represents over 98000 stores in India. RAI 
has a three charter aim of Retail Development, Facilitation and Propagation. 
The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) rules given in the new Companies Act, 2013 are a 
welcome move as it not only diverts funds for the betterment of the society but also provides for 
a road map to Corporates to structure their CSR spending. However, we seek the following 
clarifications in the rules: 
The key pointers and probable solutions are stated herein below: 
 
1. Applicability of CSR provisions on  Private limited companies:  
 
a. Requirement of independent director: Section 135(1) of the Act states that ‘every 
company’ which satisfies the thresholds set forth in this sub-section is required to 
constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee. The said Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee is required to consist of three or more directors, out of which 
at least one director is required to be an independent director. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 149(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 prescribes the number of directors that a 
company is required to have and Section 149(4) of the Act prescribes that every listed 
company shall have at least one-third of the total number of directors as independent 
directors. Section 149 of the Act does not stipulate any requirement for a private limited 
company to have independent directors.  
 
 
Thus, since Section 135(1) of the Act does not differentiate between a private company 
and a public company there seems to be an implicit requirement that a private limited 
company which meets the thresholds for constituting a Corporate Social Responsibility 
Committee) is required to have an independent director in its Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee and therefore on its Board, which is not in line with the 
provisions of Section 149(1) of the Act. Hence, In view of the above, the requirement 
to have an Independent Director for the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee 
for a Private Limited company need to be removed in line with the Companies Act 
provisions for a Private Limited company 
 
b. Minimum number of directors: The CSR provisions under the Companies Act, 2013 
require a minimum of 3 directors for the constitution of the CSR committee. Clarification 
is needed as to whether qualifying private companies would be required to appoint a third 
director to comply with the CSR provisions. 
 
2. Clarification on CSR requirement:  
 
a. We would like clarity on Part II, Clause 1 (d) and (e) of the CSR rules where “surplus 
arising out of CSR activities” and “any income arising there from CSR activities” have 
been spelt out. We would like to understand the context under which these “surpluses” 
and “incomes” might arise considering that the company is required to earmark a certain 
percentage of the average net profits every year towards CSR Activities.  
 
b. While the reporting framework under CSR rules suggest that the unspent amount of the 
specified CSR spend to be rolled over to the succeeding financial years, it does not clarify 
whether the excess spend of over and above 2 percent mandatory CSR spend in any 
particular financial year can be carried forward in succeeding financial year or not. 

 
 
 
 
 
c. For driving greater efficiencies in the delivery systems, the CSR Committee constituted 
under sec. 135(1), shall prepare the CSR Policy of the company for 5-10 years and to 
accomplish this, every year they should prepare a list of CSR projects/programmes which 
a company plans to undertake during the implementation year, specifying modalities of 
execution in the areas/sectors chosen and implementation schedules for the same. 
 
 
d. The methodology of computation of Net Profit, in addition, clarified that any exceptional 
or unprecedented income should be exempted.  Further, the requirement of 2% of net 
profit before tax is discriminatory and the requirement should instead be 2% of net profit 
after tax.  
 
3. Utilisation of CSR fund:  
 
While the CSR rules specify that CSR activities shall not be exclusively for the benefit of 
employees / their families, it does not provide any objective criteria of certain benefits (not 
exclusive) given to employees / their families that could be regarded as CSR activities. Costs 
related to employ volunteerism should be considered as CSR and the rules should suggest it 
to be monetized on the basis of salaries. Any expenditure made on evaluation and monitoring 
should also be considered as CSR. 
 
Moreover, companies should be allowed to provide proprietary assets to focused group of 
beneficiaries as an enablement/empowerment project as per the CSR Policy of the company 
and it can be monetized for accounting and reporting 2% CSR spend.  
 
However, any political activity/ event or any political party or an entity which is in any 
manner directly or indirectly related to a political party or engaging in any political activity 
or being directly or indirectly managed or controlled by a person engaged in political activity 
spends which are targeted to or discriminates based on caste, religion, faith, sexual 
orientation should not be included in the CSR list. 
 
Please refer to the annexure attached below for the recommended list of items which 
should be included in CSR activities. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
4. CSR and tax provisions:  
 
Questions may arise with regard to tax deductibility of expenditure incurred on CSR 
activities. One argument is that it is in the nature of allocation of profit, hence will not be 
allowed as deduction for tax purposes. However, the counter argument is that there is a legal 
obligation on the company to incur such expenses and non spending these costs may have 
legal/ other regulatory implications on the company. 
 
Deductibility of expenditure incurred on CSR activities should be allowed as deduction for 
computation of taxable income. In certain past cases also, voluntary CSR expenses have been 
treated as tax deductible. To avoid legal complications, the CBDT may clarify that CSR 
expense will be treated as allowable expenditure under section 37 of the Income-tax Act 
 
5. Non compliances of CSR norms:  
 
We would request you to kindly clarify the penalty provisions that would be applicable if 
there is a contravention of Section 135 of the Act or of the CSR Rules. In addition to the 
clarification, a suitable insertion of the penalty that would be applicable for contravention or 
violation of the CSR rules will bring clarity for the below reasons: 
a. Non-disclosure of reasons for spends towards CSR in Boards’ Report: In case the 
Company fails to spend the required amount as per the Section 135, the Board of 
Directors have to state reasons for not spending such amount in the Board Report. 
Failure to disclose in the Board’s Report will entail the company and its officers 
in default being visited with penalty as per Section 134 (8) of the Act. 
b. Punishment where no specific punishment or penalty is provided: If the company 
or any officer of the company contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or the 
rules made thereunder for which no penalty or punishment is provided elsewhere 
in the Act, penalty as per Section 450 of the Act shall be levied on the company 
and its officers.  
Since the draft rules do not contain a specific provision regarding the penalty that 
would be applicable for contravention, one would infer that contravention of Section 
135 and the CSR Rules would be visited with penalty under Section 450 of the Act 
and not penalty contained in Section 469(3) of the Act. 
. 
 

 
 
 
 
We hope and believe that you will receive our representation favorably and look forward to your 
kind action in this regard. 
 
Looking forward to an early reply, 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
For Retailers Association of India 
 
 
Gautam Jain 
Head – Advocacy & Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
 
The following are the items which should be added to the list of items in which Corporates can 
spend for CSR:  
 
 
CSR activity 
Description 
R&D  
Research and development of new technology or products which can 
be for community use 
 
Disaster relief 
Cost borne by the company for immediate disaster relief. Value of 
products must be measured on the basis of MRP/unit as it includes 
costs such as R&D etc 
 
Innovation 
Funding innovation and incubation of projects 
 
Salary of Employees 
The salaries of the employees that are directly working on CSR 
Projects as per the Company CSR Policy  
 
Donations 
Donation of any products/ hardware/ software/ solutions/ services of 
the Company to any organization/ school/ trust/ society or any other 
person(s) which will be utilized for the benefit of the community or 
section of community 
Proprietary Assets 
Provide proprietary assets like software to focused group of 
beneficiaries as a enablement/empowerment project 
 
Persons with disability 
Work done for persons with disabilities (PWDs), Disaster 
Management, in-house green initiatives and rural development. 
 
Safety Infrastructure 
Building safety infrastructure in the local area in which the company 
operates (e.g. footbridges, road safety initiative) 
 
