 
111/112, Ascot Centre, Near Hotel ITC Maratha, Sahar Road, Sahar, Andheri (E), Mumbai – 400099 
Tel: +91 22 28269527 – 29 Fax: +91 22 28269536 Email: info@rai.net.in Website: www.rai.net.in 
CIN: U91990MH2005GAP151959  
RAI National Council 
 
Atul Chand,  
ITC - LRBD 
Avijit Mitra,  
Infiniti Retail (Croma) 
B A Kodandarama Setty, 
Vivek Ltd. 
B S Nagesh,  
Shoppers Stop Ltd. 
Bhaskar Bhat,  
Titan Industries Ltd. 
Govind Shrikhande,  
Shoppers Stop Ltd. 
J Suresh, 
Arvind Brands 
Jamshed Daboo, 
Trent Hypermarket Ltd. 
Kabir Lumba,  
Lifestyle International (P) Ltd. 
Kishore Biyani,  
Future Group 
Krish Iyer, 
Walmart India 
Noel Tata, 
Trent Ltd.  
Pranab Barua, 
Aditya Birla Retail Ltd. 
Rafique Malik,  
Metro Shoes Ltd. 
Rahul Mehta,  
CMAI 
Rakesh Biyani,  
Future Group 
Shashwat Goenka, 
Spencer’s Retail 
Vinay Nadkarni,  
Globus Stores Pvt. Ltd. 
              2nd February 2017 
              RAI/ADV/2017/322 
To, 
 
Tmt P. Amudha, 
Hon’ble Secretary, 
Department of Labour, 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
 
Subject - Renewal of 365 days store opening notification 
 
Hon’ble Secretary, 
 
Greetings from Retailers Association of India!  
 
It is my pleasure to write on behalf of Retailer’s Association of India.  
 
Retailers Association of India (RAI) is the unified voice of Indian retailers working with all the stakeholders 
for creating the right environment for the growth of the modern retail industry in India. RAI is the body that 
encourages, develops, facilitates and supports retailers to become modern and adopt best practices that will 
delight customers. RAI has a three charter aim of Retail Development, Facilitation and Propagation. RAI is 
the premier body of Retailers in India having around 1000 member establishments including large and small 
retailers in the country having approximately 1,72,000 stores.  
 
Sir, we gratefully acknowledge the move by your progressive department to allow all the retail 
establishment in the state of Tamil Nadu to keep their stores open throughout the year. We are attaching 
the notification – G.O. (MS) No: 55  dated 25-02-2016 issued by your honorable department. The said 
permission has been issued for a year which is expiring on 24-02-2017. 
 
The move has been much appreciated by the entire retail industry and this has helped the industry to 
provide an interrupted service to the consumers and also contributed to the increase in employment 
opportunities.  
 
We would be really honored if a renewed notification could be issued in regard to 365 days working of retail 
establishments in the state. We would like to request your honorable department if the said notification 
could be granted for a period of five years. 
 
Ma’am, a high level delegation from the retail industry can come and discuss with you in person, the 
modalities of the same. We would like to seek your appointment at as time as per your convenience 
to discuss how the retail industry can be made stronger, thus augmenting the state’s economy and 
social well-being.  
 
We believe such a meeting would surely bear fruitful results in both, supporting the industry as well as 
taking forth the objectives of the government. 
 
Looking forward for your kind response. 
 
Warm Regards, 
 
Gautam Jain, 
Director – Advocacy 
 
Cc 
 
Thiru M.Karunanidhi, 
Hon’ble Joint Secretary,  
Department of Labour, 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
 
