                                                                            
                             
 
111/112, Ascot Centre, Near Hotel ITC Maratha, Sahar Road, Sahar, Andheri (E), Mumbai – 400099 
Tel: +91 22 28269527 – 29 | Email: info@rai.net.in | Website: www.rai.net.in 
CIN: U91990MH2005GAP151959 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                   17.12.2025 
Shri Piyush Goyal 
Hon’ble Minister of Commerce & Industry 
Government of India 
Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi – 110011 
 
Subject: Proposed exemption of amusement machines from the safety of 
household, commercial and similar electrical appliances (quality control) 
order, 2025  
 
 
Hon. Minister,  
Greetings from Retailers Association of India (RAI)! 
  
RAI is the unified voice of Indian retailers working with all the stakeholders for creating the right 
environment for the growth of the modern retail industry in India. It encourages, develops, 
facilitates and supports retailers to modernise and adopt best practices that will delight 
customers. RAI is the premier body of Retailers in India, having around 14000-member 
establishments, including large and small retailers in the country, representing approximately 
700,000 retail stores. 
 
We are concerned that the proposed application of the Safety of Household, Commercial and 
Similar Electrical Appliances (Quality Control) Order, 2025 (QCO) to commercially operated 
amusement machines will result in significant and adverse consequences for indoor amusement 
centre operators and our retail members more generally.   
  
Indoor Amusement Centres  
  
Indoor amusement centres represent an important and growing segment of the broader retail 
industry. Spending on experiences has increased significantly in recent years and leisure 
and entertainment-based spending has been one of the key drivers of this trend. By 
attracting consumers to organised malls and retail precincts, indoor amusement centres make a 
valuable contribution to the performance and viability of complementary and adjacent retailers.   
  
Our indoor amusement centre members include some of the world’s leading operators. 
Some have been operating in India for decades and many have invested a significant amount of 
capital. These members have adopted best practices from other parts of their networks to ensure 
that Indian consumers benefit from best-in-class safety and access to the latest and most 
innovative amusement machines.  
  
Concerns regarding the application of the QCO  
 
We fully support the Government’s objectives of strengthening product safety, competitiveness 
and manufacturing strands. However, applying the QCO to commercial amusement machines 
would carry significant and unintended consequences for both indoor amusement centre 
operators and the broader retail ecosystem that depends on the footfall driven to retail 
destinations by indoor amusement centres. 

                                                                            
                             
 
111/112, Ascot Centre, Near Hotel ITC Maratha, Sahar Road, Sahar, Andheri (E), Mumbai – 400099 
Tel: +91 22 28269527 – 29 | Email: info@rai.net.in | Website: www.rai.net.in 
CIN: U91990MH2005GAP151959 
 
  
  
The consequences of greatest concern to our members are as follows:  
  
1. Constrained supply and slower refresh cycles: Indoor amusement centre operators 
routinely rotate, upgrade and replace amusement machines to appeal to changing 
consumer 
preferences. 
Imposing 
restrictive 
importation 
and testing requirements on these low volume, highly customised amusement machines 
will inevitably impede this process, diminishing the appeal of indoor entertainment 
centres.  
 
2. Cost to consumers: The additional compliance and logistics costs associated with a 
with heavy, large format amusement machines will lead to increased costs to consumers 
and a reduction in the quality and variety of amusement games offered to consumers in 
India.  
  
3. Adverse impact on retail employment and performance: The incremental costs of 
compliance, constrained and delayed access to new product and consequential reduction 
in 
profitability 
and 
footfall 
will 
have 
a 
devastating 
effect 
on 
indoor 
amusement centre operators. Complementary and adjacent retailers will also suffer, 
leading to a substantial and adverse impact on retail employment and performance.  
  
Risk-based regulation  
  
We urge the Ministry to give close consideration to the regulatory burden that the application of 
the QCO to commercial operated amusement machines will impose on industry.  
  
Amusement machines operated on a commercial basis are generally:  
  
a. manufactured by reputable local and international manufacturers in compliance 
with broadly accepted international standards;  
  
b. operated by professional operators in a context where the condition and operation of 
those machines can be closely and carefully monitored;  
  
c. maintained and repaired on a regular basis by professional technicians; and  
  
d. constructed in a manner, and from materials, appropriate for high frequency use in a 
commercial context.  
  
We respectfully submit that these pre-existing controls adequately mitigate the risks associated 
with amusement machines and any residual risks do not warrant regulatory intervention in the 
form of the QCO.  
  
Conclusion  
  
RAI’s membership depends on healthy, high-traffic retail destinations. The evidence is clear 
that indoor amusement centres are key contributors to these destinations. Any marginal safety 
improvements resulting from the application of the QCO to commercially operated amusement 
machines would be far outweighed by the widespread, negative impact on indoor amusement  

                                                                            
                             
 
111/112, Ascot Centre, Near Hotel ITC Maratha, Sahar Road, Sahar, Andheri (E), Mumbai – 400099 
Tel: +91 22 28269527 – 29 | Email: info@rai.net.in | Website: www.rai.net.in 
CIN: U91990MH2005GAP151959 
 
 
 
centre operators and the other retailers who depend on the footfall driven to retail destinations 
by these operators.  
  
We respectfully urge the Ministry to exempt commercial amusement machines from the scope of 
the QCO.  
  
We hope that you will consider our appeal and look forward to your response.  
 
Warm Regards, 
For and on Behalf of Retailers Association of India, 
 
Gautam Jain, Director – Advocacy, RAI 
 
