 
Retailers stand united to ensure enforcement of new DIPP guidelines on FDI 
in E-commerce marketplace to ensure compliance with the laws of the land 
April 07, 2016, Mumbai: Retailers Association of India (RAI) brought together retailers from across the 
country on a common platform to welcome the new guidelines stated in the DIPP Press Note 3 issued 
on March 29 which define the emerging new channels. “The note is testimony to the fact that the 
government wants to ensure a level playing field for all channels. RAI would like to applaud the 
government for taking a stand on the same. The move received much appreciation from all members 
of RAI,” said Kumar Rajagopalan, CEO, RAI. 
Retailers appreciated the clarification on several important aspects of FDI in e-commerce considering 
that many e-commerce players in the country have been accessing FDI funds while behaving like quasi 
retailers. The new guidelines seek to set this right this by clearly defining what construes an e-
commerce entity following a marketplace-based model and what it can and cannot do if it seeks FDI 
through the automatic route. 
Retailers were unanimous in their belief that this clarification can create a level playing field only if the 
government puts its enforcement machinery into action. They believe that it’s high time the e-
commerce entities securing international funds and international e-commerce retailers adhered to the 
laws of the land. 
Retailers were positive that, if enforced, the policy will in fact foster a new environment of 
collaboration between retailers and marketplaces that would ensure customer convenience and 
delight.  
“The clarification has ensured that marketplaces, if run in the right spirit, could complement retailers 
by acting like malls online. Retailers would be happy to collaborate with them in the same way as they 
have collaborated with malls so far,” said Rajagopalan. 
Enforcement will also encourage a good startup ecosystem in technology as well as retail brand spaces 
in line with ‘Startup India’ programme of the Honourable Prime Minister of India. 
To ensure enforcement of the new DIPP guidelines on FDI in e-commerce, retailers have also submitted 
a collective note to DIPP. In their submission, retailers have suggested further clarifications to the 
clauses in the policy that will help prevent its contravention.  
Note: A copy of the RAI submission to DIPP is enclosed.  
About Retailers Association of India: 
Retailers Association of India (RAI) is the unified voice of Indian retailers. RAI works with all the stakeholders for 
creating the right environment for the growth of the modern retail industry in India. It is a strong advocate for 
retailing in India and works with all levels of government and stakeholders with the aim to support employment 
growth and career opportunities in retail, to promote and sustain retail investments in communities from coast-
to-coast, and to enhance consumer choice and industry competitiveness. Visit http://www.rai.net.in 
For further details, contact: Good Relations India Minakshi Singh Hase | minakshi@gri.co.in | 9819800294 
