 
 
111/112, Ascot Centre, Near Hotel ITC Maratha, Sahar Road, Sahar, Andheri (E), Mumbai – 400099 
Tel: +91 22 28269527 – 29 | Email: info@rai.net.in | Website: www.rai.net.in 
CIN: U91990MH2005GAP151959 
 
 
Industry needs urgent help to survive, and we request the following support from RBI 
 
1. Cash injection: Mandate banks to give ad-hoc working capital loans of 30% additional limits so that 
critical payments like salaries and wages can be made 
 
While RBI has increased liquidity, banks are not willing to lend as working capital lines have been 
exhausted and they do not want to take risks as cash flows for businesses will be impacted for the next 
4-5 months. In order to help banks lend to this sector, we request that the RBI steps in and partially 
guarantees loans to highly Stressed sectors like Textiles & Apparels and Organised Retail. Banks must 
be mandated to give loans, preferably with an interest subvention of 3-5% up to 30% of working 
capital. This needs to be done for both large companies and MSMEs as they are co-dependent on each 
other. The loans are required only for a period of 12 months from disbursement date.  
 
2. Extension of the moratorium  from 3 months to 6 months  
 
Demand at retail will take much longer to stabilize. Since the announcement of the 3 months 
moratorium effective March 1st, the lockdown has continued uninterruptedly and as of now stands 
extended up to May 31st and in case of Malls opening dates remain uncertain. Even when the retail 
shops are allowed to open, the volumes will be much lower than earlier. Further the industry is sitting 
on huge inventory positions that will take a much longer time to liquidate. In light of the above, RBI 
should extend the moratorium from 3 months to 6 months. 
 
3. One time restructuring window with the Banks for deserving accounts 
 
Business will remain uncertain for the next 9-12 months and hence companies will need their loans 
recast to tide over this period. For banks to support the industry through this period, a one-time 
restructuring window can be allowed where banks can restructure loans without the need to provision 
them as NPAs. In order to ensure that this is not misused, the restructuring can be limited to companies 
which were regular in their loan payments till 1st Feb 2020 and which have a positive net worth. 
 
4. Allow one-time re-setting of Term Loans and/or Lease Rental Discount (LRD) 
 
The Mall/Shopping Complex and standalone market property owners have obtained Lease Rental 
Discounting (LRD) loans against cash flows upon pledge of the Lease Rental Agreement with Retailers. 
Banks are asking the Mall owners to raise the invoice on Retailers. If the invoice is not raised the LRD 
account would go into default as NPA and Banks would be required to provision for such accounts.  
 
Retailers find themselves in a very tough situation. Due to the national lockdown, they were not 
allowed to operate the stores and therefore have nil revenue for the period. Further, they have paid 
salaries and wages. Now they are expected to arrange funds for the lease rentals.  
 
With a proposed continuing social distancing requirement, consumption is expected to remain 
subdued for the next 9-12 months. If retailers are expected to continue operations, the underlying 
rental agreement have to be reset for next 12-18 months. Thus, it is imperative that RBI allows one 
time, resetting/rescheduling of the existing LRD against such properties.  
 
If these supports are not provided, many stores will have to be closed down in the 2-3 months 
causing a permanent loss to the financial system and significant loss of employment. 
