GOVERNMENT OF TELANGANA 
ABSTRACT 
 
Labour, Employment, Training and Factories (Labour) Department – Andhra Pradesh 
Shops and Establishments Act, 1988 – Guidelines for permitting all Shops & 
Establishments to keep open on all 365 days of the year in Telangana State, for a 
period of one (1) year – Notification – Issued. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING AND FACTORIES (LABOUR) DEPARTMENT 
 
G.O.MS.No. 18 
 
 
 
 
                           Dated: 16.06.2015. 
                                                                                Read:- 
 
From the Commissioner of Labour, Telangana, Hyderabad, Letter No.Nil,  
  
Dated: 18.02.2015. 
***** 
ORDER: 
 
 
On the announcement made by the Hon’ble Chief Minister, the Commissioner 
of Labour, Telangana, Hyderabad has submitted proposals for framing new revised 
policy for keep open all Shops & Establishments on all 365 days of the year in 
Telangana State.  
 
2. 
Government, after careful examination of the matter hereby decided to permit 
all Shops & Establishments to keep open on all 365 days of the year in Telangana 
State for a period of one (1) year only, subject to conditions.  
 
3. 
Accordingly, the following Notification will be published in an Extraordinary 
Gazette of Telangana State:- 
NOTIFICATION 
In exercise of the powers conferred under sub-section (4) of section-73 of the 
Andhra Pradesh Shops & Establishments Act, 1988 (Andhra Pradesh Act No.20 of 
1988), the Government of Telangana hereby permit all the Shops & Establishments 
as defined in section 2 (21) of Andhra Pradesh Shops & Establishments Act, 1988 to 
keep open on all 365 days of the year in Telangana State for a period of one (1) year 
only, subject to the following conditions:-  
 
(i)  The working hours of the employees shall be 8 hours per day and 48 hours in a 
week. Record of over time will be maintained in the Wages Register 
separately in respect of the employees who worked beyond normal working 
hours. 
 
(ii) Every employee will be allowed to avail a Weekly Holiday as per the list 
exhibited (form 24) at the main entrance of the shop on rotation basis. 
 
(iii) If the employees are found working on any Holiday or after normal duty hours 
without proper indent of Over Time, the exemption granted will be liable for 
cancellation.  
 
(iv) Working hours of the shop shall be between 9.00 A.M. to 11.00 P.M. 
 
(v) In case of Women employees who are required to work beyond 8:30 P.M., 
transport arrangements will be provided to the women employees. A notice to 
this effect in Telugu and English will be exhibited at the main entrance of the 
shop indicating the availability of transport.  
 
(vi) All employees will be provided with Appointment Letters and copy of the same 
will be furnished to the jurisdiction inspector and acknowledgement will be 
preserved in the shop for inspection at any time. 
 
 
(P.T.O.) 
 

 
::2:: 
 
 
(vii) Visit Book will be maintained exhibiting a copy of the exemption for verification 
by the inspector for compliance with the conditions on exemption. 
 
(viii)The exemption will be valid for one (1) year only and subject to compliance with 
the conditions of exemption and also compliance with the welfare provisions 
applicable under various Labour Laws and renewal will be considered. 
 
(ix) The wages for the employees will be credited to their saving bank account. 
 
(x) EPF & ESI deductions shall be implemented in respect of the eligible 
employees. 
 
(xi) The Employer shall cooperate in implementing the “Duties of Inspection” under 
Rule 28 of the A.P. Shops & Establishments Rules, 1990 especially with 
regard to the implementation of the conditions and also the provisions of other 
Labour Laws for the workers employed in their shops. 
 
(xii) If any statutory violation is detected from the Employer of the Shop, the 
exemption will be cancelled before the sanction period. 
 
(xiii) The exemption will be remain in operation for a period of one (1) year from the 
date of publication of notification in the official Gazette unless it is revoked.  
 
(BY ORDER AND IN THE NAME OF THE GOVERNOR OF TELANGANA) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        HARPREET SINGH,  
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT 
 
To 
The Commissioner of Printing, Stationery and Stores Purchases,  
        Hyderabad (with a request to publish the notification in an  
        extraordinary issue of Telangana Gazette and supply 1000 copies  
        to the Commissioner of Labour, Telangana, Hyderabad and  
       100 copies to Government) 
The Commissioner of Labour, Telangana, Hyderabad. 
Copy to: 
P.S. to Special Secretary to Chief Minister 
P.S. to Minister (Home & Labour) 
P.S. to Secretary to Govt., LET&F Department. 
The Law (B) Department. 
Sf/Sc.  
 
// FORWARDED :: BY ORDER // 
 
SECTION OFFICER 
 
