GOVERNMENT OF TELANGANA 
ABSTRACT 
 
Telangana Shops and Establishments Act, 1988 – Guidelines for permitting all 
Shops & Establishments to keep open on all the days of the year in Telangana 
State – Extension for a further period of three (3) years – Notification – Orders – 
Issued. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
LABOUR EMPLOYMENT TRAINING & FACTORIES (LABOUR) DEPARTMENT 
 
G.O.MS.No. 51                                                                        Dated: 16-06-2016. 
                                                                             Read:- 
 
G.O.Ms.No.18, L.E.T. & F. (Lab) Department, Dated: 16.06.2015. 
 
***** 
ORDER: 
 
  
In the G.O. read above, the Government have issued orders permitting all 
Shops & Establishments to keep open on all 365 days of the year in Telangana 
State for a period of one (1) year only, subject to conditions mentioned therein.  
 
2. 
Government, after careful examination of the matter hereby decide to 
extend the permission to all Shops & Establishments to keep open on all the  days 
of the year in Telangana State for a further period of three (3) years, subject to 
certain conditions.  
 
3. 
Accordingly, the following Notification will be published in an Extraordinary 
Issue of the Telangana Gazette dated: 16.06.2016:- 
 
NOTIFICATION 
In exercise of the powers conferred under sub-section (4) of section-73 of 
the Telangana Shops & Establishments Act, 1988 (Act No.20 of 1988), the 
Government of Telangana hereby extend the permission to all the Shops & 
Establishments as defined in section 2 (21) of Telangana Shops & Establishments 
Act, 1988 to keep open on all the days of the year in Telangana State for a further 
period of three (3) years, subject to the following conditions:-  
 
(i)  The working hours of the employees shall be 8 hours per day and 48 hours in 
a week. Record of over time will be maintained in the Wages Register 
separately in respect of the employees who worked beyond normal working 
hours. 
 
(ii) Every employee will be allowed to avail a Weekly Holiday as per the list 
exhibited (Form 24) at the main entrance of the shop on rotation basis. 
 
(iii) If the employees are found working on any Holiday or after normal duty hours 
without proper indent of Over Time, the exemption granted will be liable for 
cancellation.  
 
(iv) Working hours of the shop shall be between 9.00 A.M. to 11.00 P.M. 
 
(v) In case of Women employees who are required to work beyond 8:30 P.M., 
transport arrangements are to be made to the women employees. A notice 
to this effect in Telugu and English shall be exhibited at the main entrance 
of the shop indicating the availability of transport.  
 
(vi) All employees are to be provided with Appointment Letters and copy of the 
same will be furnished to the jurisdiction Inspector and acknowledgement 
shall be preserved in the shop for inspection at any time. 
 
(P.T.O.) 
 

:: 2 :: 
 
(vii) Visit Book shall be maintained exhibiting a copy of the exemption for 
verification by the Inspector for compliance with the conditions on 
exemption. 
 
(viii)The exemption is valid for three (3) years only and subject to compliance 
with the conditions of exemption and also compliance with the welfare 
provisions applicable under various Labour Laws.  
 
(ix) The wages for the employees shall be credited to their saving bank 
Accounts. 
 
(x) EPF & ESI deductions shall be implemented in respect of the eligible 
employees. 
 
(xi) The Employer shall cooperate in implementing the “Duties of Inspection” 
under rule 28 of the Telangana Shops & Establishments Rules, 1990 
especially with regard to the implementation of the conditions and also the 
provisions of other Labour Laws for the workers employed in their shops. 
 
(xii) If any statutory violation is committed by the Employer of the Shop, the 
exemption will be cancelled before the sanction period. 
 
(xiii) The exemption will remain in operation for a period of three (3) years from 
the date of publication of this notification in the official Gazette, subject to 
fulfillment of conditions as specified above and also subject to any orders / 
instructions issued from time to time in this regard.  
 
(BY ORDER AND IN THE NAME OF THE GOVERNOR OF TELANGANA) 
 
AHMAD NADEEM, 
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT (FAC) 
 
To 
The Commissioner of Printing, Stationery and Stores Purchases,  
        Hyderabad (with a request to publish the notification in an  
        extraordinary issue of Telangana Gazette and supply 1000 copies  
        to the Commissioner of Labour, Telangana, Hyderabad and  
       100 copies to Government) 
The Commissioner of Labour, Telangana, Hyderabad. 
Copy to: 
P.S. to Special Secretary to Chief Minister 
P.S. to Minister (Home & Labour) 
P.S. to Secretary to Govt., LET&F Department. 
The Law (TLSP) Department. 
Sf/Sc.  
 
// FORWARDED :: BY ORDER // 
 
 
SECTION OFFICER 
